Distr.: General 4 January 2011 Original: English General Assembly Human Rights Council Sixteenth session Agenda item 6 Universal Periodic Review Report of the Working Group on the UniversalPeriodic Review* Maldives * Previously issued as document A/HRC/WG.6/9/L.5.  The annex to the present report is circulated as received. Contents Paragraphs Page Introduction............................................................................................................. 1–4 3 
I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process................................................ 5–99 3 
A. Presentation by the State under review........................................................... 6–35 3 
B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review........................ 36–99 6 
II. Conclusions and/or recommendations..................................................................... 100–101 14  Annex Composition of the delegation ......................................................................................................... 23 Introduction 1. The Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review, established in accordance with Human Rights Council resolution 5/1, held its ninth session from 1 to 12 November 2010.  The review of Maldives was held at the 5th meeting, on 3 November 2010. The delegation of Maldives was headed by the Minister for Foreign Affairs, His Excellency Dr. Ahmed Shaeed. At its meeting, held on 5 November 2010, the Working Group adopted the report on Maldives. 2. On 21 June 2010, the Human Rights Council selected the following group of rapporteurs (troika) to facilitate the review of Maldives: Ecuador, Ghana and Jordan. 3. In accordance with paragraph 15 of the annex to resolution 5/1, the following documents were issued for the review of Maldives: (a) A national report submitted/written presentation made in accordance with paragraph 15 (a) (A/HRC/WG.6/9/MDV/1); (b) A compilation prepared by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) in accordance with paragraph 15 (b) (A/HRC/WG.6/9/MDV/2) and a corrigendum (A/HRC/WG.6/9/MDV/2/Corr.1); (c) A summary prepared by OHCHR in accordance with paragraph 15 (c) (A/HRC/WG.6/9/MDV/3).  4. A list of questions prepared in advance by the Czech Republic, Denmark, Germany, the Netherlands, Norway, Slovenia, Sweden and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland was transmitted to Maldives through the troika. Those questions are available on the extranet of the universal periodic review. I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process 5. During the interactive dialogue, statements were made by 49 delegations. A number of delegations commended Maldives for the self-critical approach taken in its national report and presentation, and noted the broad consultation process with stakeholders, including civil society organizations, in the preparation of the national report. Several delegations also noted with appreciation the country’s transition to democracy and the holding of elections and the enactment of a new Constitution in 2008. Recommendations made during the interactive dialogue are listed in chapter II of the present report. A. Presentation by the State under review 6. Maldives acknowledged the great value of the universal periodic review process, which provided an opportunity for a small nation of 350,000 people to listen to the views of other States and to be guided by them. It stated that both the Human Rights Commission of Maldives and non-governmental organizations had played key roles in helping the Government to prepare the national report.  7. Maldives had its first-ever democratically elected Government, sworn in after a peaceful ballot and an orderly transfer of power. Maldives had a new Constitution, which guaranteed full enjoyment of human rights for all. There was effective separation of powers among the executive, legislative and judicial branches, and there were independent courts, political parties, a free press, registered human rights non-governmental organizations, and the National Human Rights Commission. 8. Maldives was a member of the Human Rights Council, was party to nearly all conventions and most optional protocols, and had welcomed visits by four special procedures mandate holders and extended a standing invitation to all others to visit. 9. In terms of challenges, Maldives could avoid or ignore the fact that serious human rights abuses had taken place over recent decades. The victims required a sense of justice and closure, and society demanded accountability. However, Maldives also could not allow sentiments of revenge to take hold and put at risk its still-fragile democratic transition. 10. The vast majority of the human rights now legally guaranteed in Maldives were new to Maldivians, and fully understanding them and exercising them responsibly would take time. This was the case for the general public, but also for the political class. The once all-powerful executive was now balanced with a far stronger Parliament and a newly independent judiciary. 11. Maldives faced major challenges in promoting the rule of law and good governance. Corruption, in particular, remained a huge problem, with far-reaching consequences for the full enjoyment of human rights in the country. Unfortunately, Maldives, as a new democracy, currently lacked the institutions to effectively tackle such problems. 12. Maldives was a proud, 100 per cent Muslim nation. Islam was central to its history, culture and national identity. Maldives saw no conflict between a strong Islamic faith and its commitment to international human rights law. Unfortunately, certain interpretations of Islam pushed in Maldives and internationally, sought to create the impression that there was an inherent tension between Islam and human rights. 13. Although it was a traditionally moderate Muslim nation, Maldives had not escaped the global problem of religious extremism and terrorism. The Government was extremely concerned at the rising influence of extremists and the increasing tendency of young Maldivians to travel abroad and come under the influence of extremist organizations. 14. The Government was committed to achieving full equality between men and women in law and in practice. However, it could escape the fact that serious obstacles to that goal persisted, despite important steps such as the removal of the constitutional bar that had previously prevented women from running for President. Persistent de facto discrimination against women stemmed from both religious influence and a Government that had been characterized by strong, centralized patriarchal rule. Violence against women was also a real problem in Maldives. 15. The Government was committed to upholding the independence and impartiality of the judiciary. A strong, independent judiciary was the ultimate guarantor of the new democratic Maldives and of the human rights of the people. Judges must be people of integrity and the highest educational and professional standing. 16. It was extremely difficult for law enforcement agencies to bring a case to a successful conclusion because of the lack of an adequate legal framework. In particular, there was an urgent need to adopt the new revised Penal Code, the Criminal Procedure Code and the evidence bill. 17. Trafficking and consumption of drugs, and the related problems of criminality and gang violence, were major problems. Some 80 per cent of the prison population consisted of drug offenders, with approximately 30 per cent serving life sentences for drug-related offences. The vast majority of prisoners were young, and the criminalization of young drug users and the imposition of severe sentences were particularly serious problems. The Government was committed to a path of rehabilitation rather than of imprisonment.  18. Maldives was acutely vulnerable at the economic, social and environmental levels. Economically, it was heavily dependent on the tourism and fishery sectors, both of which were sensitive to fluctuations in international markets. The global financial crisis had therefore badly affected the Maldivian economy, exacerbating an already fragile fiscal situation and making it increasingly difficult to promote economic, social and cultural rights. Global warming represented an existential threat to Maldives and had already undermined a wide range of human rights. 19. Maldives was the first country to have convened, under a presidential mandate, a universal periodic review Standing Committee comprising government, civil society and the national Human Rights Commission. The Standing Committee was responsible for producing the national report and, importantly, would also be responsible for coordinating the implementation of recommendations.  20. Maldives was very proud of its national Human Rights Commission, which was one of the most active national institutions in Asia, expressing hope that the new Commission, recently sworn in, would be more forthright in addressing human rights issues. The Commission was fully compliant with the Paris Principles, with one exception: the rule stating that members of the Commission must be Muslim. 21. Government efforts against gender discrimination were guided by the National Gender Equality Policy, which took a twofold approach to the problem: gender mainstreaming in all areas, and strategic action on empowerment and advancement in specific sectors. In 2009, the Government had launched a Gender Mainstreaming Policy to ensure that all policies and programmes promoted gender equality. The Government was working on a specific women’s rights bill that would guarantee the rights and obligations set out in the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women.   22. Violence against women was a major problem, and its causes and consequences were deep and far-reaching. Maldives was in the process of adopting a new bill on domestic violence. It was working with the United Nations, the Inter-Parliamentary Union and others to ensure that the bill complied with the very highest international standards. Maldives had also taken steps to amend the courts’ sentencing guidelines to provide more appropriate punishments for the perpetrators of sexual violence. 23. Trafficking was an emerging problem. Unfortunately, no official studies on the issue had been undertaken, and Maldives lacked the systems and procedures to deal with it. Steps were being taken to rectify that situation. For example, a new bill on trafficking in persons was being prepared with support from the Government of Australia, and a shelter for the victims of human trafficking was scheduled to be opened in Malé.  24. Gang-related violence was a major concern. The Government’s response had been twofold: it was trying to tackle the drug trade through a combination of the vigorous prosecution of drug dealers and rehabilitation for drug users; and the Maldives Police Service, supported by a new Act on the prohibition of gang crimes, was launching more special operations to curb gang activity. 25. The Government had taken many steps to better protect the rights of children, including in the context of abuse. Sentencing guidelines for child sex cases had been significantly strengthened in line with the recommendations of the Committee on the Rights of the Child. 26. Maldives greatly valued the thousands of migrant workers who contributed to its economy. In principle, migrant workers enjoyed the same employment rights and protection as Maldivian workers; however, in practice this was not the case. The Government was working to improve that situation by making workers aware of their rights and by establishing a stronger legal framework. Maldives had yet to become party to the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families, although the Government was working to complete all the national formalities for accession. 27. Maldives stated that it did not have any current plans to accede to the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, on the death penalty, while noting that it had a long-standing moratorium on that penalty.  28. Maldives was committed to ratifying the eight core conventions of the International Labour Organization (ILO) as soon as possible. Since joining ILO in May last year, it had worked closely with the ILO secretariat to strengthen social protection and to prepare the ground for ratification. 29. Maldivian law did not provide for freedom of religion, although in practice foreigners were allowed to practice religions other than Islam in private. 30. Maldives maintained a reservation to article 18 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, and there were no plans to withdraw it. There was strong public support for Maldives being, and remaining, a 100 per cent Muslim country. Indeed, the advent of democracy, with greater freedom of expression and the diluting of central control over cultural matters, had intensified moves away from freedom of religion. This was evident in the new draft regulations on religious unity and a private member’s bill in Parliament on banning non-Muslim places of worship. 31. Maldives, a country with a long and tragic history of torture and other cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment, was one of the original 20 States parties to the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture; the first country in Asia to ratify, and one of the first countries to establish, a national preventive mechanism; and one of the first countries to receive the Subcommittee on the Prevention of Torture. 32. Those international efforts had been translated into real on-the-ground progress. Maldives’ national preventive mechanism was one of the most active in the world, and a new prison and parole bill, which was expected to be submitted shortly, would completely modernize and rationalize Maldives’ detention system, placing a much higher emphasis on rehabilitation and providing for the implementation of a large number of the recommendations made by the Subcommittee after its visit late in 2007. 33. While there were no plans to abolish flogging, the Government was concerned that the punishment was applied in a discriminatory manner, with women far more likely to be flogged than men. The Government was willing to consider ways to address the issue, including the possibility of a moratorium, and intended to consult with Parliament on it. 34. There were no plans in Maldives to promote gay, lesbian, bisexual and transgender rights. 35. Nearly all the recommendations issued by the Special Rapporteur on the independence of judges and lawyers had been implemented. One area identified by the Special Rapporteur that remained a serious concern was the level of training and qualification of judges. This was difficult for the Government to address without encroaching on the independence of the Bar. B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review 36. Algeria indicated that it had closely followed Maldives’ transition to democracy and its progress in that regard. It welcomed recent cooperation between Maldives and human rights mechanisms, and expressed appreciation for the country’s efforts to achieve Millennium Development Goals, as well as the improvement in social indicators, notably in public health. Algeria noted that Maldives had continued to intensify efforts to lessen the impact of the consequences of its great vulnerability to environmental factors. Algeria made recommendations. 37. Austria commended Maldives for the exemplary democratic transition begun in 2008 with the enactment of a new Constitution and the holding of the first democratic and multiparty elections. Austria also recognized efforts and dedication with regard to judicial reform. It expressed appreciation for Maldives’ constructive participation in the work of the Human Rights Council and special procedures. Austria made recommendations. 38. Mexico congratulated Maldives on its transition to democracy and noted efforts to strengthen legal protection and measures to prevent torture and other ill treatment. It asked what technical assistance Maldives needed from the international community in order to develop its capacity to address cases involving the sexual abuse of women and children. Mexico made recommendations.  39. India noted the socio-economic progress in the country. It requested Maldives to share information about the causes of the high unemployment and drug addiction and steps taken in that regard. It also requested the country to share details about assistance required in the areas of judicial and prison reform. It referred to the threat posed to Maldives by climate change. India made a recommendation. 40. The United Arab Emirates noted considerable progress made and measures taken to protect the right to health, including the prevention of disease, and particularly Millennium Development Goals 4 and 5. It welcomed plans that had made it possible to eradicate certain epidemics such as polio and malaria. It asked for additional information concerning the cooperation between the World Health Organization (WHO) and Maldives. 41. Indonesia noted Maldives’ democratic reforms and that poverty was a major obstacle to the fulfilment of human rights. It acknowledged the impact of climate change on the enjoyment of a wide range of human rights. It commended Maldives for improvements made in connection with the right to health. Indonesia made recommendations. 42. Malaysia recognized the challenges faced by Maldives and noted with appreciation that it would soon shed its least developed country status. It noted that the Maldivian legal system was a mixture of Shariah and English civil and common law traditions, and requested Maldives to share best practices in ensuring the rule of law in a hybrid system. It made recommendations. 43. Finland welcomed Maldives’ decision to declare housing as one of its five priorities. It asked whether human rights were taken into account in the country’s climate change adaptation and post-disaster reconstruction processes. It also asked what measures were planned to improve housing affordability in the light of the fact that internal migration had led to overcrowding in the capital. Finland made recommendations. 44. Morocco referred to the impact of climate change on the enjoyment of human rights. It noted the progress made in the areas of freedom of expression and women’s rights. It encouraged Maldives to follow practices of other Muslim countries in the area of freedom of religion and belief. Morocco made recommendations. 45. Azerbaijan indicated its awareness of Maldives’ vulnerability to climate change and the negative impact that it could have on human rights. It noted with appreciation that the Maldives would soon graduate from the list of least developed countries. It asked whether Maldives was considering ratifying the Palermo Protocol. Azerbaijan made recommendations.  46. Sri Lanka commended Maldives for the withdrawal of its reservation to article 7 of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women and welcomed the active review of the reservations under the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the Convention on the Rights of the Child. It congratulated Maldives on becoming a member of ILO and noted the process of becoming a party to the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families. Sri Lanka also recognized the progress made in combating narcotics trafficking and consumption. Sri Lanka made a recommendation. 47. Cuba congratulated Maldives on the achievement of Millennium Development Goals 4 and 5. It also referred to progress made in the areas of infant mortality and life expectancy, health care and vulnerable groups. Cuba made recommendations. 48. Qatar noted that the national report addressed many of the achievements, challenges and difficulties faced by Maldives in the field of human rights. Qatar noted with satisfaction the democratic transformation since the adoption of the 2008 Constitution, which enshrined fundamental rights and freedoms. Qatar made recommendations. 49. Maldives stated that housing, particularly in Malé, was one of the greatest challenges facing it. In addition, one of the Government’s key pledges was to ensure affordable housing in the capital. A number of programmes had been launched to make Malé less congested and to provide better housing, including some social housing. The Government aimed to reduce rents in the capital to an affordable level through a mix of subsidies for poor families. It was also encouraging investments in the atolls so that urban congestion could be reduced. Thus, the Government was trying to decentralize development very vigorously. 50. The issue of climate change and human rights was a very difficult and important one for Maldives. A number of communities were facing severe beach erosion, and many were facing physical dangers. The Government planned to ensure shore protection so that communities on those islands could be protected from encroachments of the sea. The Government was also investing in other utilities, such as water, so that environmental deterioration would not affect the enjoyment of human rights. No consideration was being given to any forced transfer of the population to other islands. 51. Maldives had been able to make good progress in the health sector, working with WHO and the donor community. It had been able to reach out to all communities in the country through multiple-tier networks of health-care providers, from family health workers to central-level medical facilities. 52. The new 2008 Constitution had heralded a new legal system for the country, with a modern charter of rights and a new configuration for the judiciary. Efforts had been made by the Government to create an independent judiciary. It had established a permanent bench of the Supreme Court under the new Constitution. In addition, the enactment of the Judges Act and the Judicature Act was aimed at making the judiciary more professional and accountable. 53. Maldives had embarked on a new reform agenda, and the entire structure of the legal system was being reviewed and revised.  Until 2010, there had been no criminal procedure or civil procedure codes. The judiciary and the legal system had been functioning in an ad hoc manner, relying on Shariah jurisprudence to a great extent. The delegation noted that the Government had initiated a programme of legislative reforms, and that the legislative agenda prioritized the formulation of a criminal procedure code that would give effect to proper legal reforms whereby the criminal legal system would be up to date and provide remedies and procedural matters that were contemporary and accepted as standards in modern constitutions. Those legislative measures would come into effect with a view to enhancing and integrating both Shariah and common law principles into the formal legal system. 54. Canada welcomed significant progress made by the Maldives in the protection of human rights and implementation of governance reforms since the country’s 2008 election. While welcoming efforts to address gender equality  and congratulating the Government for its efforts to promote human rights internationally, particularly human rights and climate change, Canada expressed the belief that more efforts should be dedicated to promoting and protecting freedom of religion and belief and to putting an end to such practices as flogging, and requested information about how that could be achieved. Canada made recommendations. 55. The Netherlands referred to the challenges remaining in the area of justice, and expressed concern at reports of a high incidence of child abuse. It referred to the issue of discrimination and violence against women and girls. The Netherlands made recommendations. 56. Germany asked whether Maldives intended to follow up on the recommendation of the Committee on the Rights of the Child regarding discrimination in law faced by children born out of wedlock and the issue of birth registration. It also asked whether Maldives was considering ratifying the 1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees and the 1967 Optional Protocol thereto. Germany made a recommendation. 57. The Libyan Arab Jamahiriya expressed appreciation for efforts to improve the standard of living and to provide health care and social services for all. It welcomed the efforts to address discrimination against women. It expressed the hope that Maldives would request cooperation with States responsible for the major part of greenhouse emissions. It made a recommendation. 58. Bangladesh noted the considerable progress made in poverty reduction, education and health, although the national report acknowledged that women had faced discrimination. It also noted that a large portion of the population was susceptible to external shocks and that many challenges were faced by the country owing to climate change, which had resulted in responsibilities for the international community. Bangladesh made recommendations. 59. Hungary noted with satisfaction the new Constitution and the transparent conduct of the multi-candidate elections. It referred to migrant workers’ rights and to Maldives’ reservations to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. It requested information regarding the future implementation of universal periodic review recommendations, particularly with regard to the inclusion of civil society in the process. Hungary made recommendations. 60. Brazil commended Maldives for the achievement of Millennium Development Goals 4 and 5. It expressed concern at discrimination and violence against women, impunity for torture, the marginalization of persons with disabilities, the lack of child protection mechanisms, and the absence of freedom of religion or belief. It also asked what measures were being considered to prevent discrimination based on religion. Brazil made recommendations. 61. Slovakia valued Maldives’ commitment to children’s rights and praised the new gender mainstreaming policy. It noted that the Special Rapporteurs on freedom of expression and freedom of religion or belief had observed that the new Constitution granted citizenship only to Muslims. It also noted limitations on the right of migrant workers and foreigners to manifest their religious beliefs. Slovakia made recommendations. 62. The United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland applauded the commitment to accede to the Rome Statute and encouraged Maldives to curb the growth of radicalization while maintaining the right to freedom of belief. It expressed concern, and asked a question about persons beloning to potentially vulnerable groups. It underlined the challenges posed by the lack of trained personnel in the legal and judicial system, and inquired about plans to reform the legal and judicial system. It made recommendations. 63. Australia welcomed the new Constitution and commended the Government for having drawn the attention of the Human Rights Council to the issue of climate change. It urged Maldives to guarantee freedom of religion. Australia made recommendations. 64. Spain congratulated Maldives for efforts to accede to international human rights conventions. Spain asked whether Maldives planned to review legislation to end limitations on freedom of religion and to reform provisions in the Constitution that prevented non-Muslims from acquiring nationality. It also asked whether Maldives planned to stop applying the provisions of Shariah law criminalizing apostasy. It made recommendations. 65. Turkey welcomed that the new Constitution provided for separation of powers and recognized the independence of judiciary, including the appointment of women judges. Turkey stated that the Constitution would enhance freedom of religion with a view to fighting extremism. Turkey observed the achievements made in education and the development of private media, and encouraged Maldives to reinforce freedom of expression. It also encouraged States to support Maldives in addressing the threat of climate change. 66. Maldives stated that the Government had been decisive in taking measures against domestic violence. Referring to the newly submitted domestic violence bill, Maldives noted that, despite its wide scope of application, the bill fell short of allowing for expert evidence from social workers and provided for a dual role for family protection authorities: to act as an agency working on individual cases and as a regulatory body. To remedy those shortfalls, the Government had provided its comments to the political parties that had submitted the bill, and was working with non-governmental organizations to obtain support for the comprehensive bill. 67. The Ministry of Home Affairs was the main agency for implementing the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation protocol on trafficking in women and children. The Maldives police service was working with the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to establish information-sharing mechanisms in the region. The police service had established a sub-unit within the organized crimes division that addressed human smuggling using a comprehensive database. Moreover, the Department of Immigration was leading efforts to draft a new national law on anti-trafficking, with financial and technical expertise provided by the Government of Australia. Several important pieces of legislation were in the pipeline that would strengthen legal safeguards for women’s rights. These included a sexual harassment bill, a draft evidence bill and a draft revised penal code. 68. While the Penal Code did not prescribe flogging as a punishment, it was administered under Shariah. The Government was looking at ways to ensure that such punishment was not applied to women in such a discriminatory manner, and it was considering a moratorium on the punishment pending national consultations, including an opinion from Parliament. 69. Various steps to promote equity, access and the rights of women, including the development of an action plan and positive statements addressing a range of such key concerns as health and well-being, violence and safety, decision-making relationships and economic security, had been taken at the national and community levels. The national equality policy was aimed at promoting substantive equality through gender mainstreaming in all areas and action on empowerment in specific sectors. 70. Work was under way to ratify the ILO Convention on discrimination in the workplace. Moreover, the Government had recently facilitated scholarships for girls and women. Media guidelines had been formulated on gender-based violence reporting. With respect to divorce, the delegation noted that the court had begun to recognize agreements between husbands and wives. 71. There were no religious minorities in Maldives that been discriminated against. For more than 800 years, Islam had been the only religion practiced in the country, and what was faced today was a result of that legacy. The Government had an obligation to ensure that the rights of non-Muslims in Maldives were protected, and a number of measures were being taken to ensure that non-Muslims – essentially migrant workers – were able to exercise their right to practice their beliefs in private. 72. Sweden asked whether Maldives could elaborate on measures being taken to ensure the enjoyment of freedom of religion or belief as enshrined in the Universal Declaration and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. It also asked what measures were being taken to ensure non-discrimination and equal rights for citizens and other persons of different religious beliefs. In addition, it inquired about measures being taken to eliminate violence and discrimination against women. Sweden made recommendations. 73. New Zealand voiced concern about the lack of legislation to address violence against women and harassment in the workplace, and about the application of public flogging. It expressed appreciation for the country’s openness regarding its judicial problems and welcomed the establishment of the Human Rights Commission. New Zealand made recommendations. 74. Argentina asked about measures taken to eliminate discrimination against children born out of wedlock and persons with disabilities in accordance with the recommendations of the Committee on the Rights of the Child. In that connection, it asked whether Maldives had criminalized in the Criminal Code the sale of children and child prostitution and pornography. Argentina made recommendations. 75. Chile referred to the new Constitution and congratulated Maldives on its recent ratification of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and its accession to ILO. Chile expressed support for initiatives on climate change. It made recommendations. 76. France noted with appreciation the existence in Maldives of a moratorium on the death penalty since 1952 and asked what obstacles to the abolition of the death penalty existed. It also lauded the progress made on freedom of expression. Noting that Maldives was party to the Convention against Torture, it wondered about sentences of flogging often pronounced against women. France made recommendations. 77. Palestine noted existing challenges regarding children and discrimination against women. It acknowledged the efforts made to promote human rights through prison reform through the country’s agreement with the International Committee of the Red Cross, and the increase in resources to address child sexual abuse. Palestine noted the accession to the Optional Protocols to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women and the Convention on the Rights of the Child, and the achievement of Millennium Development Goals 4 and 5. Palestine made recommendations. 78. Norway expressed appreciation for Maldives’ willingness to work with the international community on human rights. It also raised the issues of freedom of religion and belief, the situation of women, and vulnerable groups such as migrant workers, lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender persons and children. Norway made recommendations. 79. Slovenia asked whether the Maldives was considering reviewing its legislation to ensure that all barriers to gender equality at the legislative and constitutional levels were abolished. Slovenia also asked whether Maldives had already considered withdrawing its reservation to article 18 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. Slovenia made recommendations. 80. Bahrain acknowledged the accession of Maldives to many international treaties, including the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, the Convention against Torture, and the Convention on the Rights of the Child. It noted the recommendation of the Committee on the Rights of the Child that Maldives ratify the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children. Bahrain requested further information about steps taken to implement that recommendation. 81. Japan noted positively recent legislation and measures to protect women, children, the elderly and the disabled. Japan welcomed the expansion of freedom of expression and commended Maldives’ accession to ILO in 2009. However, Japan regretted the incidents involving the arrest of two opposition legislators, expressing the hope that the Government and the opposition would reconcile their differences in a lawful manner. Japan made a recommendation.  82. Bhutan expressed appreciation for Maldives’ peaceful transition to democracy in 2008 and its continuous efforts in the Human Rights Council on the issues of human rights and climate change. Bhutan noted that gender discrimination and violence still existed, while welcoming the drafting of the domestic violence bill. Bhutan commended Maldives for having provided free education from the pre-primary to the secondary school level, especially for girls. Bhutan made recommendations. 83. Nepal congratulated the people of Maldives on the peaceful democratic transformation of two years ago. Nepal noted efforts for the empowerment of women and the well-being of persons with disabilities, senior citizens and migrant workers, as well as Maldives’ active role in the Human Rights Council, including with regard to climate change. 84. Ghana congratulated Maldives on the adoption of policies to promote human rights, such as the mandatory human rights training for new police personnel and the mainstreaming of gender equality across all policy areas. Ghana noted that the Constitution and legislation prohibited the public practice of religions other than Islam, and that citizenship was granted only to Muslims. Ghana noted the extreme dispersal of the population, combined with slow sea transportation, and welcomed the process of decentralization. Ghana made recommendations. 85. Chad noted the major challenges faced by Maldives, particularly as a result of climate change. It noted that the national report had been the result of broad consultations. It also noted with appreciation specific measures adopted to improve the situation of women, the disabled and the elderly. Chad made a recommendation. 86. Maldives stated that, in an effort to consolidate democracy, the Government was working to remove corruption from all Government institutions, and that it had embarked on the process. Parliamentary immunity did not extend to criminal offences outside the jurisdiction of Parliament. The police investigated allegations of corruption in Parliament. Arrests of parliamentarians had been made, and proceedings were still ongoing. Due process had been closely followed in the process. 87. The 2008 Constitution applied to all persons, not only citizens. All persons residing in Maldives were entitled to the protection provided by the charter of rights under the Constitution. 88. Progress in freedom of expression had been made. In Maldives, the media community, reflecting a broad spectrum of political and social views, thrived. In 2010, the bill establishing the Maldives broadcasting cooperation had been enacted. The bill of freedom of information had been resubmitted in 2008. Regarding reports that a journalist had been caught up in demonstrations, the delegation confirmed that no journalist had been arrested. 89. There was no legislation in Maldives protecting the rights of lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender persons. Nevertheless, there had been little or no intolerance of or discrimination against such persons in Maldivian society, certainly not at the institutional level. Lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender persons were a vulnerable group, but so far they had not been marginalized. The Government was, however, concerned about demands from radical religious groups that the State actively discriminated against such persons. 90. The United States expressed concern that the Constitution did not provide for religious freedom and that citizenship was granted only to Muslims. It commended Maldives for enacting the new Employment Act in consultation with ILO. It also commended Maldives for removing the constitutional bar preventing women from running for high political office. It made recommendations. 91. Nigeria commended Maldives for the progress made in achieving democratic governance. It welcomed Maldives’ ratification of human rights instruments and its open invitation to the special procedures. However, Nigeria noted the existence of challenges and the need to address key issues such as democratic consolidation, corruption, religious extremism and terrorism. Nigeria made a recommendation. 92. Bosnia and Herzegovina commended the new Constitution, the ratification of ILO fundamental conventions, the accession to the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture, and the issuance of the standing invitation to all thematic special procedures. It requested further information about the role of civil society in the preparation of the national report. Bosnia and Herzegovina made recommendations. 93. Trinidad and Tobago noted with satisfaction the framework put in place aimed at consolidating democracy and gains made by Maldives in poverty eradication, education and health care. It applauded Maldives for its international leadership on climate change, noting the implications that it would have for the human rights of the Maldivian people. It made a recommendation.  94. Timor-Leste expressed appreciation for the broad consultations in the preparation of the national report and commended Maldives for the progress and achievements in human rights. It noted the issue of violence against women and children as stated in paragraphs 57 and 62 of the national report, and the lack of recognition of children born out of wedlock. Timor-Leste made a recommendation. 95. The Philippines asked how Maldives wished to see the Human Rights Council and OHCHR further develop the link between human rights and climate change. It also asked about measures being taken to address the challenges relating to migrant workers’ rights, including with regard to those of irregular status. Further, it requested information about additional measures being taken to combat gender-based discrimination. The Philippines made recommendations. 96. Jamaica noted that Maldives was party to several major international human rights instruments and was reviewing reservations to some of these in view of changes introduced in the new Constitution. It also commended Maldives for achieving Millennium Development Goals on child mortality, improving maternal health and attaining universal access to free primary and secondary education. It made a recommendation. 97. Ecuador commended Maldives’ initiatives with regard to the rights of vulnerable groups, particularly women, children and persons with disabilities. It acknowledged Maldives’ reforms in the area of justice and called for the country to consider the penitentiary situation as among its priorities. Ecuador made recommendations. 98. Saudi Arabia noted the creation of an independent human rights commission in conformity with 2008 constitution. It also noted with appreciation the accession to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, and the Convention against Torture. It praised the efforts made in the education sector by making it free and compulsory. It noted that encouragement to the private sector had proved that Maldives recognized education as a human right.  It made a recommendation. 99. Mauritius noted with interest that Maldives had been in the forefront calling for special recognition of the vulnerabilities of small island developing States to challenges such as climate change and natural disasters. It also appreciated the steps taken to withdraw reservations to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. Noting challenges faced by Maldives, Mauritius called on the international community to provide required assistance to enable it to better uphold human rights.  II. Conclusions and/or recommendations 100. The following recommendations will be examined by Maldives, which will provide responses in due course, but no later than the 16th session of the Human Rights Council, in March 2011. The response of Maldives to these recommendations will be included in the outcome report adopted by the Council at its 16th session, in March 2011: 100.1. Consider acceding to ICRMW (Bosnia and Herzegovina); 100.2. Accelerate the process of the ratification of ICRMW (Algeria); 100.3. Consider the ratification of ICRMW and the Protocol to prevent, suppress and punish trafficking in persons, especially women and children (Philippines); 100.4. Ratify promptly the Optional Protocol to ICESCR and the Optional Protocol to CRPD (Spain); 100.5. Sign and/or ratify the Second Optional Protocol to ICCPR; the Optional Protocol to ICESR; ICRMW; the Optional Protocol to CRPD; and the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance (Argentina); 100.6. Accede to the Second Optional Protocol to ICCPR, prohibiting the death penalty in all circumstances (France); 100.7. Ratify ICRMW, taking into account national consultations held in this connection (Mexico); 100.8. Ratify ICRMW in order to enhance the full enjoyment of human rights (Palestine); 100.9. Ratify ICRMW, ensuring that the rights to freedom of religion or belief of all migrant workers and members of their families are respected, inter alia (Ecuador); 100.10. Consider ratifying ILO core conventions, the 1951 Refugee Convention and the 1967 Protocol thereto, and the Protocol to prevent, suppress and punish trafficking in persons, especially women and children (Brazil); 100.11. Accede to the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court and to the 1951 Refugee Convention and the 1967 Protocol thereto (Ecuador); 100.12. Ratify outstanding core international human rights instruments, and accede to the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court (Slovenia); 100.13. Ratify the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court (Austria); 100.14. Consider reviewing and withdrawing reservations to ICCPR and other core human rights instruments, particularly where such reservations work to undermine the commitment to non-discrimination included in these treaties (Hungary); 100.15. Review reservations to CEDAW, ICCPR and CRC with a view to withdrawing or limiting them (Slovenia); 100.16. Continue to cooperate with human rights mechanisms and to reconsider their reservations to ICCPR, CEDAW and CRC (Palestine); 100.17. Make further efforts with a view to withdrawing reservations to ICCPR, CEDAW and CRC (Brazil); 100.18. Withdraw reservations in respect of article 18 of ICCPR (Austria); 100.19. Withdraw reservations to articles 14 and 21 of CRC as well as to article 18 of ICCPR (Slovakia); 100.20. Remove its reservation to article 16 of CEDAW concerning the equality of men and women in all matters relating to marriage and family relations, and adjust its domestic framework accordingly (Canada); 100.21. Withdraw reservations to ICCPR, CEDAW and CRC (Spain); 100.22. Continue legislative reforms aimed at guaranteeing the effective implementation of the rights and obligations contained in international instruments, such as CEDAW, CRC and CAT (Brazil); 100.23. Make additional efforts to ensure that domestic law is brought into line with the provisions of CEDAW, particularly concerning marriage, divorce, inheritance, ensuring equality of rights for both spouses and the adoption of comprehensive measures to combat all forms of violence against women and girls, and the adoption of laws on domestic violence and all forms of sexual abuse (Spain); 100.24. Step up the efforts to adopt the remaining 120 bills that have been identified by the Government as requiring enactment during its term of office in order to implement the changes provided for in the 2008 Constitution (Algeria); 100.25. Complete the legislative framework through the enactment of laws provided for in Constitution to strengthen the legal protection of fundamental rights and freedoms (Qatar); 100.26. Enact the new draft Penal Code pending before Parliament (Austria); 100.27. Enact legislation related to CEDAW, as no corresponding domestic law has so far been enacted (Hungary); 100.28. Strengthen the legal framework for women’s rights and its implementation (Norway); 100.29. Amend existing legislation so that evidentiary requirements are made less strict and do not fall disproportionately on the victim, and so that the sentencing of sexual abusers is brought into line with the gravity of the crime committed (Netherlands); 100.30. Adopt and implement draft laws regarding persons with disabilities and concerning mental health, as referred to in the national report, with a view to providing a normative framework to strengthen awareness-raising campaigns on human rights and disability (Mexico); 100.31. Ensure that the Human Rights Commission is made fully compliant with the Paris Principles (India); 100.32. Upgrade the status of the Human Rights Commission of Maldives to “A” status according to the Paris Principles by fully ensuring its independence, including with regard to budgetary allocations (Germany); 100.33. Strengthen the independence of the Human Rights Commission of Maldives and work with it to improve the human rights education of the judiciary and the public (New Zealand); 100.34. Continue its efforts to guarantee human rights and freedoms as enshrined in the Constitution (Bhutan); 100.35. Continue its efforts to further accelerate its ongoing process to promote and protect human rights and freedoms (Sri Lanka); 100.36. Continue its efforts aimed at promoting and protecting all human rights (Palestine); 100.37. Continue its efforts aimed at strengthening and protecting human rights (Saudi Arabia); 100.38. Introduce into the life of the people of Maldives only that which is in keeping with their traditions and customs and their public morals (Chad); 100.39. Adopt and implement an effective legal framework and undertake appropriate public awareness campaigns to eliminate discrimination against women (Slovakia); 100.40. Take effective measures to overcome deep-rooted stereotypes on the role of women and girls (Austria); 100.41. Adopt a more systematic approach to building public awareness about gender equality and the potential contributions that women can make to social and economic development, which would help break down existing barriers faced by women in employment and education, while at the same time ameliorating the incidence of sexual exploitation and violence suffered by women (Trinidad and Tobago); 100.42. Continue to implement a national gender equality policy by strengthening legislation for protection and non-discrimination, as well as equality (Chile); 100.43. Step up efforts to implement the 2009 Gender Mainstreaming Policy with a view to combating the de facto discrimination faced by Maldivians and to explore the possibility of adopting additional measures to combat violence against women in the country (Malaysia); 100.44. Adopt measures to curb discrimination against women and violence against children (Bangladesh); 100.45. Take measures to strengthen women’s rights, in particular to encourage greater representation of women in public life and combat sexual and domestic violence (United Kingdom); 100.46. Take concrete steps to increase the representation of women in decision-making bodies (Norway); 100.47. Speed up the implementation of laws enacted regarding the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, and enact adequate legislation that can put an end to the violence to which they are subjected (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya)1; 100.48. Establish equal rights for all children, regardless of the marriage status of their parents (Bosnia and Herzegovina); 100.49. Make further efforts and take the legislative and administrative measures necessary to eliminate discrimination against persons with disabilities on the ground (Qatar); 100.50. Reconsider the legal status of lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender people, and consider taking concrete steps to protect them from violence and discrimination (Norway); 100.51. Introduce policies aimed at ending discrimination against individuals on the basis of their gender identity or sexual orientation, and repeal legislation criminalizing homosexuality (Australia); 100.52. Repeal legal provisions which criminalize sexual activity between consenting adults of the same sex (Canada); 100.53. Decriminalize homosexuality and, as a first step, declare a moratorium on the application of penalties (France); 100.54. Take measures to prevent human rights violations based on sexual orientation and gender identity (France); 100.55. Ensure that its new Penal Code is fully consistent with international human rights standards and that it abolishes corporal punishment and the death penalty (United Kingdom); 100.56. Establish a moratorium on State executions with a view to formally abolishing the death penalty, in addition to ratifying the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (Canada);/establish a moratorium on executions with a view to abolishing the death penalty (Slovenia); 100.57. Consider abolishing the death penalty in the context of the moratorium (Chile);/abolish the death penalty (Austria);/abolish definitively the death penalty and ratify the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (Spain); 100.58. Take all measures to end the application of cruel, inhuman or degrading penalties such as flogging (France); abolish criminal penalties that infringe on the physical integrity of convicts, for example, flogging (Austria); prohibit the use of public flogging (New Zealand); abolish corporal punishment, in particular public flogging (Brazil); 100.59. Work towards eliminating all forms of violence against women (Bhutan); 100.60. Take further steps to address issues of violence against women, including to finalize the Women’s Right Bill, the Domestic Violence Bill and the Children’s Act, as early as possible, and consider withdrawing its reservation to article 16 of CEDAW (Timor-Leste); 100.61. Take all measures necessary to ensure the elimination of violence and discrimination against women, and review its reservation to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women with a view to withdrawing it (Sweden); 100.62. Give priority to addressing all forms of violence against women and girls, inter alia, by providing redress and protection services to victims of such crimes (Norway); 100.63. Establish additional mechanisms for protecting citizens against domestic violence, and adopt the provisions that would ensure legal redress for gender-based violence. Important steps in this regard include the expeditious passage of legislation to promote women’s rights, prohibit sexual harassment and criminalize domestic violence (United States); 100.64. Ensure that its draft Domestic Violence Bill addresses the investigation, prosecution and punishment of perpetrators of violence against women, and that it is implemented as a priority (New Zealand); 100.65. Intensify awareness-raising and educational campaigns to combat violence against women, and adopt measures to improve women’s participation in the decision-making process (Algeria); 100.66. Continue the commendable public campaigns against violence against women and children, and ensure the swift adoption and implementation of the new Bill on Domestic Violence (Austria); 100.67. Continue to improve efforts to combat gender-based violence, and establish a mechanism for protecting abused women (Indonesia); 100.68. Take measures to eradicate traditional stereotypes of women, especially through educational programmes, and enact legislation on domestic violence and all forms of sexual abuse (Netherlands); 100.69. Continue its measures to tackle the problem of violence against women, including domestic violence (Azerbaijan); 100.70. Prioritize legislation on women’s rights, sexual harassment, domestic violence and the protection of children against abuse (Australia); 100.71. Consolidate the achievements made, particularly through gender mainstreaming in all fields; grant autonomy to women; and face challenges arising in this regard, particularly the fight against violence against women (Morocco); 2 	The recommendation as made during the interactive dialogue was “Abolish criminal penalties that infringe on the physical integrity of convicts, for example, amputation and flogging (Austria)”. 100.72. Adopt and implement the draft law on domestic violence referred to in the national report, taking into account the recommendation of the Committee on the Rights of the Child concerning the incorporation of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women into domestic law (Mexico); 100.73. Increase efforts to address the serious problem of violence against children, including by ensuring full legal protection against the sexual abuse of children (Norway); 100.74. Continue efforts to prevent violence and sexual abuse against boys and girls, and increase its efforts to bring to justice those responsible (Argentina); 100.75. Continue ensuring the promotion and protection of the human rights of children in the country, including through the establishment of appropriate programmes and measures aimed at combating the spread of a culture of violence among Maldivian youth and children (Malaysia); 100.76. Take further measures to strengthen child rights and the child protection system, in particular to prevent sexual and physical abuse, to tackle underage marriage/concubinage and to ensure that children under 18 years are not punished as adults in the judicial system (United Kingdom); 100.77. Enact legislation to criminalize trafficking of persons, and put in place procedures to deal with those people vulnerable to exploitation and trafficking (Indonesia); 100.78. Take effective measures to combat human trafficking, including the adoption of relevant laws (Azerbaijan); 100.79. Implement the United Nations Basic Principles on the Independence of the Judiciary and the Role of Lawyers (New Zealand); 100.80. Continue its efforts to further strengthen the judiciary (Azerbaijan); 100.81. Take concerted steps to build a strong and independent judiciary (United Kingdom); 100.82. Develop a professional code of conduct for judges, and actively support the establishment of an independent bar association (Netherlands); 100.83. Allocate additional resources to provide human rights training for judges in order to enhance their current knowledge of human rights principles (Netherlands); 100.84. Continue efforts aimed at improving access to continuing education and training in the area of human rights for judicial and legal officers, including through bilateral and other engagement with partners, in the light of the expressed need for greater capacity-building and technical assistance in key areas of governance (Malaysia); 100.85. Expedite efforts to enact a Juvenile Justice Act in compliance with the Convention on the Rights of the Child (Ghana); 100.86. Ensure that children in conflict with the law have access to education (Ghana)3; 3 The recommendation as made during the interactive dialogue was “Raise the minimum age of 100.87. Strengthen the role of the family in order to protect children from drugs and sexual exploitation, and reduce juvenile delinquency (Qatar); 100.88. Ensure the right to freedom of religion or belief (Brazil); 100.89. Include constitutional measures to provide for freedom of religion or belief to all persons residing in the country (United States); 100.90. Amend its legislation to enable the enjoyment and practice of freedom of religion or belief for both citizens and foreigners living in the country (Ghana); 100.91. Take concrete steps to encourage and facilitate open and public debate on religious issues (Norway); 100.92. Take all measures necessary to ensure full respect for freedom of religion or belief and freedom from discrimination on the basis of religion, including by way of allowing non-Muslims to become citizens and withdrawing its reservation to article 18 of ICCPR (Sweden); 100.93. Take all measures necessary to ensure full respect for freedom of expression and to guarantee that journalists can practice their profession freely (France); 100.94. Ensure that all people, including migrants, are allowed to practice their religion or belief freely, including by enacting legislation that explicitly protects the right to freedom of religion or belief (Norway); 100.95. Remove legislation which discriminates against individuals on the basis of their religion or belief (Australia); 100.96. Consider appropriate measures to eliminate discrimination against religious minorities in accordance with international standards (Slovakia); 100.97. Take legislative and practical measures with a view to the realization of the right to freedom of religion and belief (Austria); 100.98. Enact legislation that also allows non-Muslims to acquire Maldivian citizenship (Austria); 100.99. Enact legislation to ensure that all persons may freely exercise their religion in public and build places of worship (Austria); 100.100. Examine the possibility of decriminalizing apostasy and blasphemy (Argentina)4; 100.101. Make the necessary amendments to legislation in order to ensure that communities of all faiths and religions have an equal place in a democratic society (Indonesia); 100.102. Decriminalize apostasy (Austria); criminal responsibility to at least 12 years, and ensure that children in conflict with the law have access to education (Ghana)”. 100.103. Create an environment of freedom of the media, and encourage media to project positive images of women and of the equal status and responsibilities of women and men in the private and public spheres (Slovenia); 100.104. Implement legislation, as required under the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, to end discrimination against women and harassment in the workplace (New Zealand); 100.105. Continue to effectively implement pro-poor growth and employment creation strategies (Indonesia); 100.106. Increase steps to improve the participation of women in the labour market and in leadership and governance positions in the public and private sectors (Philippines); 100.107. Draft and enact legislation prohibiting and punishing all forms of trafficking in persons, including the forced labour of migrants. Promulgate laws imposing stricter punishments for violations, and hold employers who violate laws accountable and establish a national minimum wage (United States); 100.108. Put in place specific programmes to improve the employment situation, in particular for young people (Algeria); 100.109. Take swift and efficient action to mitigate the adverse effects of the rising cost of housing in Malé through various measures, such as social benefits or microfinance schemes, in order to enhance the enjoyment of the right to adequate housing (Finland); 100.110. Further develop and enhance education (Saudi Arabia); 100.111. Continue the policy of free education for all children, through cooperation and assistance from the international community (Bhutan); 100.112. Continue to apply programmes and measures to guarantee the enjoyment of the right to education and the right to health (Cuba); 100.113. Intensify efforts in improving access to education for students from low-income families (Slovakia); 100.114. Elaborate a strategy for creating more openness and tolerance in the general public for migrants and their rights (Norway); 100.115. Cooperate with other countries that have large communities of migrant workers to find a solution in accordance with international human rights standards (Hungary); 100.116. Continue its efforts to implement its development programmes (Bangladesh); 100.117. Continue to allocate resources for effective poverty reduction measures (Ghana); 100.118. Continue to apply strategies and development plans at the socio.economic level throughout the country (Cuba); 100.119. Continue its legislative, institutional and socio-economic reforms to provide an effective framework to address gender mainstreaming, violence against women, religious intolerance, particularly with regard to citizenship, freedom of speech, and human trafficking, and focus on the very key question of achieving the targets of the Millennium Development Goals, which will comprehensively address the key question of human rights (Nigeria); 100.120. Give further consideration to enacting legislation and formulating national action plans with concrete goals: to prevent the economic exploitation of and hazardous work by children; and to combat drug abuse, human trafficking and the sexual exploitation of women and children (Japan); 100.121. Seek the support of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and the international community in the key areas listed in the report for which capacity-building is required (Jamaica); 100.122. Seek the assistance and necessary expertise of United Nations specialized agencies in building and strengthening institutions to rehabilitate those engaged in drug-related crimes (Qatar); 100.123. Continue to develop and implement its adaptation strategies with assistance from the international community (Bangladesh); 100.124. Take all measures for the purpose of post-disaster reconstruction and adaptation to climate change, with a human-rights-based approach, and carry out consultations with the concerned local communities, giving special attention to women, children and persons with disabilities in this process (Finland); 100.125. Continue consultations with civil society in the follow-up to the review (Austria); 100.126. Give a yearly briefing to the Human Rights Council on the follow-up to the recommendations of this universal periodic review session as a voluntary measure (Hungary). 101. All conclusions and/or recommendations contained in the present report reflect the positions of the submitting State(s) and/or the State under review. They should not be construed as endorsed by the Working Group as a whole. Annex Composition of the delegation The delegation of Maldives was headed by His Excellency Dr. Ahmed Shaheed, Minister for Foreign Affairs, and was composed of the following members: • H.E. Dr. Ahmed Ali Sawad, Attorney-General of the Republic of Maldives; • H.E. Ms. Iruthisham Adam, Permanent Representative of the Republic of Maldives to the United Nations Office at Geneva; • Ms. Aishath Liusha Zahir, Deputy Permanent Representative, Permanent Mission of Maldives to the United Nations Office at Geneva; • Mr. Marc Limon, Counsellor, Permanent Mission of Maldives to the United Nations Office at Geneva; • Mr. Muruthala Moosa, Third Secretary, Permanent Mission of Maldives to the United Nations Office at Geneva; • Ms. Emily Ferguson, Intern, Permanent Mission of Maldives to the United Nations Office at Geneva; • Ms. Athinangela Chatzidimitriou, Intern, Permanent Mission of Maldives to the United Nations Office at Geneva. 