Distr.: General 24 March 2011 Original: English General Assembly Human Rights Council Seventeenth session Agenda item 6 Universal Periodic Review  Report of the Working Group on the UniversalPeriodic Review* Namibia * The annex to the present report is circulated as received. Contents Paragraphs Page Introduction............................................................................................................. 1–4 3 
I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process................................................ 5–95 3 
A. Presentation by the State under review........................................................... 5–35 3 
B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review........................ 36–95 6 
II. Conclusions and/or recommendations..................................................................... 96–100 14  Annex Composition of the delegation ......................................................................................................... 22 Introduction 1. The Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review (UPR), established in accordance with Human Rights Council resolution 5/1 of 18 June 2007, held its tenth session from 24 January to 4 February 2011.  The review of Namibia was held at the 12th meeting on 31 January 2011. The delegation of Namibia was headed by Hon. Pendukeni Iivula-Ithana, MP, Minister of Justice. At its 16th meeting held on 2 February 2011, the Working Group adopted the report on Namibia. 2. On 21 June 2010, the Human Rights Council selected the following group of rapporteurs (troika) to facilitate the review of Namibia: Pakistan, Brazil and Mauritius. 3. In accordance with paragraph 15 of the annex to resolution 5/1, the following documents were issued for the review of Namibia: (a) A national report submitted/written presentation made in accordance with paragraph 15 (a) (A/HRC/WG.6/10/NAM/1) and (A/HRC/WG.6/10/NAM/1/Corr.1); (b) A compilation prepared by the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) in accordance with paragraph 15 (b) (A/HRC/WG.6/10/NAM/2); (c) A summary prepared by OHCHR in accordance with paragraph 15 (c) (A/HRC/WG.6/10/NAM/3).  4. A list of questions prepared in advance by the Czech Republic, France, Germany, Latvia, Netherlands, Norway, Slovenia, Sweden and the United Kingdom was transmitted to Namibia through the troika. These questions are available on the extranet of the UPR. I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process A. Presentation by the State under review 5. Namibia welcomed the opportunity of participating in the review process to provide an overview of its human rights landscape. 6. Namibia noted that it had become independent only in 1990, after more than 100 years of oppressive apartheid rule, and that its history had been characterized by widespread human rights violations and brutal repression.  At independence, Namibia had put in place a framework to promote and protect human rights. Chapter 3 of the Constitution protected most of the human rights referred to in the various international human rights instruments.  7. To repeal past discriminatory laws, the Government established the Law Reform and Development Commission (LRDC) in 1991 to review such laws with a view to enacting progressive legislation. Both the higher courts and the LRDC have made important contributions to reform Namibia’s pre-independence legislation and policies. 8. The Constitution established the Office of the Ombudsman with a specific mandate to investigate alleged violations of human rights and recommend remedial action. 9. Namibia ratified the core international human rights instruments, which are directly applicable in the national legal order. The Government submitted various reports in line with its international treaty obligations and intends to submit those that were still outstanding. The Ministry of Justice has put in place the necessary measures to address this backlog, but capacity-building remained a challenge. 10. Namibia has made significant strides in gender equality, education, law reform, land reform and the transformation of the public service and economic sector. Significant progress has also been made in enabling Namibians to share in its natural resources. A food security strategy had been adopted. 11. Namibia has adopted policies and laws to strengthen the social protection of vulnerable groups by providing a monthly social grant to war veterans, the elderly, persons with disabilities, orphans and vulnerable children. Special assistance programmes have been put in place to provide free access to health services, housing, employment and other services to previously marginalized communities. The Social Security Commission administers a number of social welfare funds. 12. Namibia has enacted labour laws to promote good industrial relations, recognizing the freedom to organize, the right to collective bargaining and the right to strike. 13. Regarding civil and political rights, there is an open playing field for political parties to contest elections, supervised by the Electoral Commission of Namibia. Individuals are free to associate and form political parties. Since independence, Namibia has held regular presidential and national elections. 14. Regarding the rights of indigenous communities, the Government identified certain communities that were particularly deprived (the San, the Ovatue and the Ovatjimba) and had implemented support programmes to raise their standard of living.  15. There are approximately 60,000 San people in Namibia, but only about 2,000 of them still follow a traditional way of life. As Namibia is a signatory to the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples, it is committed to ensuring that these formerly marginalized groups are fully integrated in mainstream society and the economy. 16. The 1991 Land Conference resolved that there would be no claims to ancestral lands by any person in Namibia. In an effort to assist indigenous groups, the Government bought and continues to acquire land for formally disadvantaged Namibians for resettlement.  17. All the indigenous communities have free access to health facilities and antiretroviral medicine is offered to them free of charge.  18. The Ministry of Home Affairs and Immigration employed mobile teams in all 13 regions to go to the remote areas and assist citizens, and especially the formally marginalized groups, in obtaining national identity documents. Parliament had passed legislation to enable members of the formally marginalized groups to actively take part in economic activities without being discriminated against as was the case before independence. 19. Violence against women and children is a serious problem and had increased in recent years. A number of rape cases had been prosecuted, resulting in sentences of 5 to 45 years’ imprisonment for convicted rapists, while other cases were pending before the courts for further police investigation. However, a lack of police vehicles, of expertise in dealing with violence against women and children, and of facilities to accommodate vulnerable witnesses, as well as the withdrawal of complaints by victims, continued to hamper investigations and prosecution.  Legislation that the Government had enacted to curb violence against women and children included the Combating of Domestic Violence Act No. 4 of 2003, the Combating of Rape Act No. 8 of 2000, the Combating of Immoral Practices Amendment Act No. 7 of 2000 and the Criminal Procedure Amendment Act No. 24 of 2003. 20. Women and Child Protection Units have been established in all 13 regions in Namibia to handle and investigate cases relating to sexual offences. The Ministry of Gender Equality and Child Welfare and various stakeholders launched an annual awareness campaign against gender-based violence. The Government has also launched a "Zero Tolerance Campaign against Gender-Based Violence including Human Trafficking". 21. On homosexuality, it was noted that the Constitution outlawed discrimination of any kind. Since independence, no single case of discrimination on the basis of sexual preference or orientation had appeared before the courts. Homosexuals were not prosecuted for practising same-sex activities in private, although this practice was not condoned, and was considered immoral and prohibited in public. Same-sex marriages were not recognized. The Government has no intention of amending current laws. 22. With reference to the right not to be subjected to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or torture, Namibia stated that incidents of excessive use of force by members of the Police Force during arrest of suspects had been noted with concern. The Police had embarked on awareness campaigns and training on the use of minimum force during arrests.  The Namibian Police Force also offers human rights training during its Basic and Developmental Courses. 23. According to the Constitution, evidence obtained by torture shall not be admitted in court.  A bill to criminalize torture was under consideration. 24. Regarding the signing of the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (OP-CAT), the relevant Ministries would do the necessary research and make submissions to the Inter-Ministerial Committee on Human Rights, which would then make a recommendation to the Cabinet. This approach applies to all outstanding treaties which Namibia has not yet ratified. 25. Namibia noted that police holding cells were seriously overcrowded because of a lack of detention facilities.  The Cabinet has authorized the Ministry of Safety and Security to budget for the construction of remand prisons. 26. Convicted minors are detained separately from adults at a Juvenile Centre, which has educational facilities. However, the availability of juvenile detention facilities, especially in police cells, remained a major challenge.  27. There is no Government policy authorizing the forced sterilization of HIV-positive persons. The alleged forced sterilization of women living with HIV/AIDS is a matter that is before the court and the outcome of the case will determine what action to take.  28. All Namibians have access to health facilities and antiretroviral medicine is offered free of charge. 29. Namibia provides constitutional guarantees to a fair trial. The Government has taken measures to reduce the backlog of criminal cases through the appointment of additional judicial officers and prosecutors, with the provision of legal aid to indigent persons. The Government was also working on a strategy to improve the working conditions of legal officers in order to reduce staff turnover, which contributed to the backlog in the courts. Both the High and Lower Courts were implementing case management systems to overcome administrative bottlenecks in the management of the case flow. 30. The Ministry of Gender Equality and Child Welfare had embarked on awareness-raising campaigns as one way of addressing the problem of human trafficking.  In 2009, the Ministries of Labour and Social Welfare, Gender Equality and Child Welfare, and Safety and Security had conducted joint inspections on child labour and trafficking in the agricultural sector in nine regions. The purpose was to withdraw all children found to be engaged in child labour; to issue Compliance Orders; to lay criminal charges against persons employing children under-age as prohibited by the Labour Act 2007; and to raise public awareness of child labour through the media, regional councillors and traditional leaders. 31. Whenever children were found to be engaged in child labour they were placed in the care of social workers while a criminal case was opened by the Namibian police. 32. The Electoral Commission of Namibia had always been mindful to compile and publish an accurate Voters’ Register.  The Ministry of Home Affairs and Immigration has embarked upon a project to automate all birth, marriage and death records in order to eliminate possible errors in the data required by the Electoral Commission. 33. With respect to media freedom, Namibia referred to Article 21 of the Constitution. Parliament had enacted the Broadcasting Act No. 9 of 1991 and the Communications Act No. 8 of 2009 to provide the legal framework and create a liberal environment for the media. In 2007, Namibia was ranked 25th out of 169 countries in the world on the World Press Freedom Index rankings of Reporters Without Borders, and, in 2010, Namibia topped Africa on press freedom on the same rankings.  34. Regarding the establishment of a national human rights institution, Namibia stressed that the Office of the Ombudsman was in full compliance with the Paris Principles and had received “A” status in April 2006. 35. With reference to cooperation with special procedures, it was noted that thus far there had been only one request for a visit, namely from the independent expert on the right to access to safe drinking water and sanitation, who would visit in July 2011. While the Government did not see the need to have a standing invitation, it was open to requests for more visits. B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review 36. During the interactive dialogue, 48 delegations made statements. Recommendations made during the dialogue are to be found in section II of the present report. A number of delegations commended Namibia for its human rights accomplishments in such a short period of time, since its independence in 1990. They commended Namibia for the comprehensive report and for the co-operative attitude of the Namibian Government in this process, identifying the main challenges, commitments, progresses and difficulties in the protection of human rights. Delegations appreciated Namibia for its open and constructive consultations in preparation of the National report.  37. Botswana commended Namibia for maintaining a stable democratic and political culture since independence, and for its commitment to promoting a policy of national reconciliation, after years of human rights violations under minority white administration. It also commended Namibia for several impressive legislative and administrative measures to ensure effective enjoyment of human rights, including the adoption of more than 20 Acts of Parliament. It also noted Namibia’s desire to review legislation with respect to human trafficking. Botswana made a recommendation. 38. South Africa welcomed Namibia’s efforts to enhance the protection of women’s rights and to eliminate all forms of discrimination against women, and encouraged it to continue this trend and to take further action in this regard.  It welcomed the priority given to the health sector and applauded the encouraging decrease in the HIV/AIDS infection rate, sought additional information on the progress made in fighting this pandemic. It noted that violence against women remained a challenge. South Africa made recommendations.  39. Nigeria recognized that Namibia is facing enormous challenges in the fulfilment of its commitments to the promotion and protection of human rights, including inadequate financial and other resources, capacity-building and technical assistance needs, lack of technology and technical know-how. Nigeria urged Namibia to intensify efforts in enhancing the effectiveness of the various mechanisms entrusted with the enforcement of human rights. Nigeria made recommendations. 40. Zimbabwe commended Namibia for its socio-economic, judicial and political actions regarding the promotion and protection of human rights. Zimbabwe was fully cognizant of the fact that more is yet to be done and achieved, noting that further progress is needed; it called on the international community to assist Namibia in consolidating gains made. Zimbabwe made recommendations. 41. Swaziland noted Namibia’s policy of national reconciliation entailing forgiveness of those who resisted freedom and independence. It commended its efforts to integrate indigenous minority groups into mainstream society and economy, particularly the San Development Programme aimed at improving the San’s socio-economic lives. It also acknowledged, inter alia, the establishment of the Ombudsman Office, prohibition of torture, inhuman treatment and of racial discrimination, the rights to health and access to safe drinking water and affirmative action and gender equality programmes. Swaziland commended the Zero Tolerance Against Gender-based Violence, including Human Trafficking, and passing the Prevention of Organized Crime. 42. Portugal welcomed Namibia’s efforts to define and criminalize torture and, regarding the Traditional Courts and Traditional Authorities Act, requested clarification on the powers of traditional judges, their knowledge of and abidance by human rights law, including the prohibition of torture. Acknowledging progress concerning gender issues, Portugal noted persisting societal discrimination against women, particularly regarding inheritance, land ownership and school access for young pregnant women and asked about measures taken. Portugal expressed concern about discrimination, violence and punitive acts against homosexuals and enquired about measures taken regarding HIV/AIDS campaigns. It also asked about measures to ensure the right of access to safe drinking water and basic sanitation. Portugal made recommendations.  43. Cuba recalled Namibia’s colonial history and the consequences of apartheid on the economy, including structural difficulties in employment creation and the perpetuation of poverty and inequality. International exploitation and pillaging of resources was key to Namibia’s underdevelopment. Cuba acknowledged the policies and measures adopted since independence to mitigate the negative effects of the past. It recognized difficulties to ensure food security. It noted improvements in areas of health, primary education, rights of women, children and ethnic minorities including the San and efforts to address HIV/AIDS. Cuba made recommendations. 44. China noted the implementation by Namibia’s parliament of the constitutional protection accorded to the economic, social and cultural rights, including through enacting legislation. It acknowledged Namibia’s investment in education and efforts to improve health services. China also noted its commitment to reducing inequalities and improving social welfare, while understanding the challenges it faces as a developing country. China made a recommendation. 45. Algeria acknowledged Namibia’s palpable achievements including on national reconciliation, combating racial discrimination, empowerment of women, rights of the child, and access to health and education, reflecting the country’s wish to break with its colonial history of human rights denial. Algeria noted income distribution inequalities, despite relatively high per capita income. Noting that HIV/AIDS remained a challenge for the population’s welfare and the economy, it appealed to stakeholders to contribute to combating this pandemic. Algeria made recommendations. 46. Palestine welcomed the progress made in Namibia regarding women’s empowerment, socially and legally, in addition to the number of constitutional and legislative provisions and Government policies that support gender equality. Palestine commended Namibia for its accession to the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination (CERD), on 11 November 1982. Palestine made a recommendation. 47. India commended Namibia’s transition to parliamentary democracy from apartheid and a colonial past, noting inherited socio-economic inequalities and structural distortions. It acknowledged the establishment of judicial oversight mechanisms and the Office of the Ombudsman and emphasized efforts towards environmental protection, despite challenges of water scarcity and food security and the mining sector’s economic importance, and commended high public expenditure on education and health. Efforts to combat discrimination were welcomed. India sought information on planned measures to reduce high income inequalities and address perennial food deficits and encouraged Namibia to continue improving the administration of justice and expanding participation of indigenous peoples and minorities in development.  48. Singapore noted that, given its painful experience under apartheid colonial rule, Namibia has since its independence enacted various laws aimed at protecting human rights. It noted that Namibia had been among the countries with the highest HIV/AIDS prevalence rates, leaving many children orphaned. It noted that Namibia has rightly prioritized HIV/AIDS in its overall national human and economic development agenda.  It also noted that Namibia is among the countries in the world that spend the highest share of GDP on public expenditures such as education and the health sector. It noted that Namibia has implemented a Comprehensive Primary Health Care Programme in all health districts in the country. Singapore made recommendations. 49. Turkey welcomed the enactment of the Prevention of Organized Crime Act and the database on gender-based violence, including human trafficking statistics and child labour victims.  It noted restoration of social facilities as shelters for victims of trafficking and gender-based violence and a social awareness campaign on these issues. Turkey welcomed the establishment of the Communication Regulatory Authority, the Media Ombudsman Office including the nomination of a human rights lawyer to the latter, and commended Namibia for collaborating with UNICEF regarding birth certificates for newborns and identity cards for orphans. It noted decreasing HIV/AIDS infections. Turkey made recommendations.  50. Italy welcomed Namibia’s abolitionist stance towards the death penalty, and its cooperation with the International Committee of the Red Cross, UNHCR and the Namibian Red Cross. Concerning freedom of press and information, Italy noted that criticism of the ruling party could, in some political circles, provoke harsh reactions including intimidation of journalists, which induced journalists to practice self-censorship. Italy sought information about measures to address this specific problem. It noted overcrowding of prisons and detention centres, which are poorly maintained. Italy touched on the prevalence of domestic violence and alleged forced sterilizations of women affected by HIV/AIDS in public hospitals. Italy made recommendations.  51. Namibia noted that it has gone into farms where child labour was reported to be a concern. Namibia has taken action to stop this offence and has taken measures to stop the perpetuation of this crime. Namibia will continue to look into child labour issues and will combine that issue with trafficking issues, including across the borders of neighbouring countries.  52. Namibia is working towards eliminating social inequality. It has decided to formulate a policy entitled the New Equitable Economic Empowerment Framework.   53. In response to questions and comments, Namibia explained, inter alia, that traditional leaders were recognized to the extent that their practice of traditional laws did not contradict the Constitution. Traditional leaders were not instruments for the subjugation of women and it was incorrect to presume that the traditional leaders were perpetuating gender inequality and violence.  Instead, they were part of that reform process.   54. Almost 65 per cent of the population now had access to safe drinking water on tap. Namibia was doing everything possible to improve upon this achievement. 55. Namibia would continue to build on its achievements in education.  The education sector had received eight per cent of annual GDP ever since independence.  Health received the second highest budget support annually.   56. To eliminate social inequality, the Government had formulated the New Equitable Economic Empowerment Framework. 57. On the HIV/AIDS pandemic, the Government had made great strides.  In the 1990s, some 22 per cent of pregnant women had HIV, against the current 16 per cent.  With the introduction of free antiretroviral medicine, the death rate had also dropped. 58. The Government was introducing free meals at schools and had enacted grants for orphans and other programmes for orphans, vulnerable children, the elderly and war veterans.  59. The policies of the apartheid regime did not allow Namibians to be educated in order to man the court. The number of judges and lawyers was therefore very low. Namibia was now using the expertise of its own citizens. The Supreme Court still received support from neighbouring countries, for which Namibia is grateful. 60. On the issue of forced sterilization of women of child-bearing age living with HIV/AIDS, Namibia stated that it did not have such a policy, and the assumption was based on allegations which were before the courts.  61. Morocco noted Namibia’s commitment and its rich culture and traditions, reflected in its legal and institutional framework, which is constantly being improved. Morocco welcomed inter alia the draft law on the realization and protection of children, which, once adopted, will cover all its international commitments. Morocco asked about the importance given to the draft law on trafficking. At the institutional level, Morocco welcomed the annual children’s Parliament in promoting and respecting the rights of children by ensuring that they freely participate effectively in public life. Morocco asked for more information on the role of the Office of the Ombudsman in human rights training. Morocco made recommendations. 62. Chile noted the awareness of the international community of the reality that affected Namibia and its efforts to achieve national reconciliation and overcome structural inequality, which are vital for the proper working of multiparty democracies and the upholding of human rights.  Chile believed that the creation of the Ombudsman as a national human rights institution with “A” status in line with the Paris Principles, reveals Namibia’s commitment to society to protect and uphold human rights. Chile highlighted the efforts made to implement public policies that guarantee economic, social and cultural rights, in particular the action of the Government in the area of education and primary education.  Chile made recommendations. 63. Austria commended Namibia for its achievements since its independence, but noted remaining challenges. Expressing concerns that the accused in the Caprivi High Treason Trial remain detained without judgement, it enquired about measures to ensure their right to be tried without undue delay. Concerning gender-based violence, it commended Namibia’s zero-tolerance policy, but noted the call by the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women to review the Married Persons Equality Act to eliminate discrimination against women in customary marriages, and enquired about the entry into force of the related draft bill. It also requested information on steps taken to end discrimination of indigenous groups and minorities. Austria made recommendations.  64. Norway was concerned about reported harassment of journalists, media organizations, human rights defenders and non-governmental organizations (NGOs). It noted that the right to fair trial is implemented in the Namibian Constitution, but that reports from civil society indicate serious delays in hearing cases and frequent postponement of criminal court cases, while the accused are being kept under arrest. It also noted that there is still room for improvement regarding women’s rights. Norway commended Namibia for its initiative in protecting the rights of indigenous peoples and marginalized communities. Norway made recommendations. 65. Malaysia was encouraged to note Namibia’s democratic principles and successive, regular and peaceful elections at the local, regional and national levels. Malaysia noted that some areas require further efforts, including difficulties related to unemployment, income disparity, HIV/AIDS, and the rights of the indigenous and minority groups. Malaysia was convinced of the Government’s commitment to make improvements in those areas. Malaysia made recommendations. 66. Ghana noted that challenges Namibia faces in the timely submission of reports to the human rights treaty bodies are due to human resource constraints. Ghana commended Namibia’s Comprehensive Primary Health Care Programme, which has been implemented since independence in all districts in the country. It also commended Namibia for the educational reforms it has pursued since 2000 and urged Namibia to remain steadfast in its quest to achieve universal education for all its citizens. It observed that in 2010 UNICEF noted widespread violence against children. The response of the legal system in cases of rape and gender-based violence remained inadequate, especially concerning the reporting of cases through to the courts. Ghana made a recommendation.  67. Sweden welcomed information provided on efforts to address overcrowding of prisons and detention centres. While acknowledging that the Constitution provides for freedom of speech and of the press, it noted reports of limitations to press freedom. Sweden sought an assessment of the Communications Regulatory Authority Act and its impact. It noted continued discrimination of women in practice and through traditional practices. Sweden made recommendations.  68. Azerbaijan noted that Namibia’s national human rights institution is accredited with “A” status. It also noted the measures taken for prevention of gender-based discrimination and violence against women, including the anti-rape legislation, the Married Persons Equality Act and Combating of Domestic Violence Act. Azerbaijan made recommendations.  69. Lesotho acknowledged Namibia’s strides to harmonize domestic legislation with regional and international human rights instruments and noted with satisfaction its efforts in the field of education, by ensuring free and compulsory education in Government schools. Lesotho noted remaining challenges, mainly due to limited capacity and resources and appealed to the international community to provide needed technical and financial assistance. Lesotho made a recommendation.  70. Angola emphasized its ties with Namibia and noted that its policy of reconciliation and pardon had contributed to the successful and peaceful transition from apartheid to multi-party democracy and to consolidating institutions, including regular elections. It commended Namibia for its example given in protecting human rights reflected by the incorporation of a Charter of Rights into the Constitution and welcomed its contribution to regional peace and stability. Angola recognized efforts targeting the Khoisan groups towards their economic and social inclusion. It also acknowledged the reduction of HIV/AIDS rates and easier access to anti-retroviral medication and thanked Namibia for its assistance on refugee issues. Angola made a recommendation. 71. Zambia acknowledged the accreditation with “A” status by the International Criminal Court of Namibia’s National Human Rights Institution. Applauding socio.economic achievements, including with regard to education and health, it expressed concerns that violence against women and children remained a challenge and urged Namibia to address this issue as well as child labour and migrants, and to make torture a specific crime. Zambia welcomed the HIV/AIDS Strategic Plan and the Policy calling on all stakeholders to contribute in fighting HIV/AIDS. Zambia made recommendations. 72. Burkina Faso observed that Namibia had incorporated a Charter of Rights in its Constitution and invited it to place all sets of rights on an equal footing. It noted that human rights treaties are not applicable in all cases, thus limiting their application, and enquired about measures to remedy this situation, including through constitutional amendments. It also sought information on plans to integrate human rights education in its educational system and encouraged Namibia to pursue efforts to improve indigenous peoples’ and women’s rights. Burkina Faso made recommendations.  73. Mozambique commended Namibia for promoting the rights of indigenous peoples, including Bank funds, farm allocations, employment-related affirmative action and feeding programmes. It noted the Ombudsman’s powers to protect, promote and enhance human rights. Mozambique acknowledged compulsory and free of charge primary education and expansion of health care facilities in the countryside and health-care service improvements. Progress in empowering women and the scrapping of discriminatory traditional practices was acknowledged. Mozambique encouraged Namibia to continue enacting human trafficking legislation and implementing its HIV/AIDS programmes. 74. Sudan welcomed the consultative approach adopted for drafting Namibia’s national UPR report. Sudan commended Namibia for its multiple national legislation adopted to support international human rights instruments. Sudan welcomed the ratification of a large number of regional and international treaties of human right. Sudan raised one question concerning gender in particularly with regard to Namibia’s efforts to guarantee equality between men and women in land ownership. Sudan made recommendations. 75. France noted prison overcrowding and torture in prisons, and enquired about measures to prevent ill-treatment in detention, improve prison conditions and ensure detainees are judged within reasonable time frames. Noting widespread violence, including sexual violence against children, France enquired about measures improving the effectiveness of mechanisms to punish and prevent violence against children.  Concerning prevailing discrimination against indigenous populations, impacting access to health care, income, education and basic services, France sought information on planned remedial measures. France made recommendations.  76. Nicaragua noted that Namibia began its democracy with a firm commitment to human rights and fundamental freedoms. With only one per cent of its land being arable, Namibia faces problems such as extreme poverty. Nicaragua welcomed the high public spending and expressed support for Namibia’s long-term economic and social policy. Challenges also include high levels of inequality inherited from apartheid, which could be overcome through joint efforts in a single culture of equality. Nicaragua emphasized that a solid policy of education is fundamental if Namibia is to achieve this common objective. Nicaragua made a recommendation. 77. Pakistan reminded the Council to keep in mind during the review process for Namibia that it must remain cognizant of the harsh fact that the present situation of human rights cannot be seen in a vacuum, as the people of Namibia had suffered one of the most horrific violations of human rights for more than 100 years during the apartheid colonial rule. Pakistan took note of a number of measures taken to promote economic, social and cultural rights, in particular efforts to provide health and education services at the grass-roots level. Pakistan was pleased to note progress in the promotion of women and would expect that advancement in all spheres of life would be instrumental in their struggle to end violence against women, which remains a challenge for Namibian society. Pakistan made a recommendation. 78. Canada commended Namibia for its commitment to promoting human rights, including of women and children, assist HIV/AIDS orphans, and eliminate discrimination against the San people. Recognizing Namibia’s role in the Kimberley Process, it noted the need to strengthen and refine efforts regarding trade in conflict diamonds. Despite measures in place, domestic violence and rape and inequalities, including in accessing and owning land, prevailed. Canada was also concerned at reported sterilizations of women with HIV/AIDS and potential limitations of the right to privacy by the Communications Act. Canada made recommendations.  79. Germany noted the backlog of cases reported by the Human Rights Committee in 2004 and requested an update on progress in the Caprivi trial and when a court ruling was expected. Germany made recommendations. 80. Spain welcomed Namibia’s accession to most international human rights instruments. Spain invited Namibia to begin a process of consultation with representatives of civil society and persons with disabilities concerning the application of recommendations in this review. Spain made recommendations. 81. The United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland recognized Namibia’s progress since independence. Recognizing capacity issues regarding police, prison and judicial system, it expressed concerns about prison facilities, overcrowding and the length of time for court cases to be heard, which could be considered a violation of international obligations, despite the right to a fair trial and the presumption of innocence provided for in the Constitution. It made recommendations. 82. Mexico recognized Namibia’s efforts in promoting and ensuring respect for human rights, particularly its efforts in the transition to a parliamentary democracy and noted the establishment of a national human rights institution in accordance with the Paris Principles. Mexico made recommendations.  83. The United States of America commended Namibia for improvements of the human rights situation despite recent challenges and acknowledged the establishment of the Office of the Ombudsman and the projected national human rights action plan. Noting prevailing gender-based violence and traditional practices impeding exercise by women of their inheritance and land ownership rights, it sought information on measures to combat gender-based discriminatory practices. It welcomed the Prevention of Organized Crime Act and the Zero Tolerance Campaign on gender-based violence and human trafficking, but remained concerned at the lack of legislative protection and prevention measures. It made recommendations.  84. Argentina welcomed Namibia’s initiatives to promote the civic participation of children. Argentina enquired about measures taken to strengthen the administration of justice and due process and to improve the political and economic participation of women, with particular attention to women in vulnerable situations. Argentina made recommendations. 85. Australia recognized the impact of poverty, HIV/AIDS and food insecurity on the full enjoyment of human rights in Namibia. Noting its strong ratification record, Australia called on Namibia to implement the commitments in domestic legislation. Noting progress in promoting women’s rights, Australia remained concerned by high rates of rape and sexual and gender-based violence and child abuse, including sexual violence and trafficking. Australia encouraged Namibia to enact the Child Care and Protection Bill. Australia made recommendations.  86. Ecuador commended Namibia on its achievements in many important areas of human rights. It noted remaining challenges requiring many efforts and economic and human resources, and encouraged Namibia to continue efforts to ensure equality, and security and guarantee of rights. Ecuador made recommendations. 87. Slovakia commended Namibia for the A-status accreditation with the International Criminal Court of the Office of the Ombudsman and for integrating human rights education into national curricula. It observed that torture was not defined as statutory crime and, noting the backlog of pending cases, that the right to be tried without undue delay was not fully implemented. It noted concerns about the large number of children under 14 engaged in economic activities. Slovakia made recommendations.  88. Latvia noted Namibia’s good level of press freedom. Appreciating information provided on the issue of standing invitations to special procedures, it noted the recent request for a visit by the independent expert on human rights obligations related to access to safe drinking water and sanitation. Latvia made a recommendation. 89. Slovenia commended Namibia for respecting children’s rights to civic participation, including when developing the Child Care and Protection Bill, but expressed concerns about trafficking in children, child prostitution and child labour, and the lack of access of women to adequate health-care services, including to sexual and reproductive health services, widespread illegal abortion and increasing rates of HIV/AIDS infected women and of maternal mortality. It also noted persistent discrimination on the grounds of ethnicity. Slovenia made recommendations. 90. Niger paid tribute to Namibia’s policy of national reconciliation and encouraged its authorities to continue constructive policies in the areas of health, education and the promotion and protection of society’s most vulnerable. It noted with satisfaction women’s participation in the democratic progress, including involvement in decision-making and in elected office. Namibia’s sectoral policies allowed it to become a middle-income country. Niger made recommendations.  91. Uganda commended Namibia’s achievements in protecting and promoting human rights. It noted persisting patriarchal attitudes and stereotypes about gender roles and was concerned that the Traditional Authorities Act may negatively impact women by perpetuating the use of harmful and discriminatory customs and cultural and traditional practices and enquired about measures to address these concerns. Uganda encouraged the international community to provide required assistance. Uganda made recommendations.  92. Mauritius commended Namibia for its continuous and diligent effort to improve the promotion and protection of human rights through the implementation of strategic policies, which had led Namibia to be classified as one of the top five countries to live in in Africa according to the International Living and New Quality of Life Index of 2011. As part of the African Union, Namibia has always supported regional and international initiatives to protect fundamental rights, including the African Charter. Mauritius commended Namibia for signing and ratifying many of the core human rights treaties. Mauritius also commended Namibia’s effort to address social and economic inequalities through the implementation of its long term strategic plan – Vision 2030. Mauritius made a recommendation. 93. The Democratic Republic of the Congo commended Namibia’s efforts to protect minority indigenous peoples and welcomed the social, legal and political progress in empowering women. It sought information on consequences of the past apartheid policy and on progress made in combating HIV/AIDS.  94. In response to comments, Namibia confirmed once more that it would set in motion a process of reviewing treaties to which it was not yet a party and that it might want to ratify. On questions concerning the Convention on Migrant Workers, Namibia noted that it did not have a large number of immigrants, although nobody was prohibited from applying for work in Namibia.  95. In conclusion, Namibia stressed that it would continue its efforts to eliminate obstacles to the full enjoyment of human rights by all Namibians. Namibia would take into consideration all concerns expressed during the review. Its main priorities at this time are food security, education and health, which take up much of its budget. Bearing in mind that it had reached independence only recently, Namibia asked the international community to show understanding for its continued need for international assistance II. Conclusions and/or recommendations 96. The following recommendations formulated during the interactive dialogue/listed below enjoy the support of Namibia: 96.1. Strengthen efforts to fulfil obligations under the Convention on the Rights of the Child (Australia); 96.2. Review its criminal law framework with a view to incorporate the crime of torture in accordance with its international obligations (Slovakia); 96.3. Adopt appropriate legislation on trafficking in human beings, prohibit the use, procuring or offering of children for prostitution and ensure that children under the age of 14 are not engaged in child labour (Slovenia); 96.4. Intensify its efforts regarding the process of enacting legislation on human trafficking (Azerbaijan); 96.5. Accelerate the passage and implementation of anti-trafficking legislation and, in the interim, use current laws, like the Prevention of Organized Crime Act (POCA), to prosecute sex and labour trafficking offences and adequately punish trafficking offenders (United States of America);  96.6. Strengthen the mechanisms of legal and social protection of children against violence, particularly sexual, of which they are victims (France);  96.7. Ensure that the national legislation is in line with the obligations of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and its Optional Protocol (Spain); 96.8. Conduct a review process and if necessary, amend its national legislation (Spain); 96.9. Pursue efforts to address concerns regarding child labour, in particular through its Action Programme to Eliminate Child Labour in Namibia 2008.2012 (Botswana); 96.10. Redouble efforts aimed at fully implementing the Action Programme to Eliminate Child labour in Namibia 2008-2012 (Malaysia); 96.11. Continue applying strategies and socio-economic development plans in the country (Cuba); 96.12. Continue its economic and social policies in the framework of Vision 2030 by paying greater attention to programmes for the fight against poverty and the reduction of social inequalities (Algeria); 96.13. Further promote women’s and children’s rights taking into consideration the views of relevant treaty bodies of the United Nations system (Italy); 96.14. Continue its policy of promoting and protecting the rights of indigenous peoples by consolidating it with further measures to ensure the full exercise of the rights of all components of Namibian society while respecting its traditions and identity (Morocco); 96.15. Remain steadfast in pursuing its exemplary policies towards gender equality, particularly by strengthening measures to eradicate gender-based violence (Lesotho); 96.16. Put in place mechanisms to systematically collect and analyse disaggregated data to enable assessment of the effectiveness of policies and initiatives aimed at preventing and eliminating violence against women (Canada); 96.17. Continue the policy of national reconciliation in a spirit of accommodation (Niger); 96.18. A participatory and inclusive process with civil society in the implementation of UPR recommendations (Norway); 96.19. Seek technical assistance from OHCHR in regard to human and material constraints faced (Azerbaijan); 96.20. Request technical assistance from OHCHR regarding the preparation of reports which need to be submitted to treaty bodies (Burkina Faso);  96.21. Continue to take effective measures to eliminate social inequalities such as skewed distribution of income and to promote the sound and sustained development of the country’s economy and society (China); 96.22. Make more efforts to, pass additional legislation and carry out awareness-raising and counselling to eliminate the consequences of racial discrimination in all its forms (Sudan);  96.23. Continue its efforts in combating racial segregation and discrimination in various fields, particularly in education and continue the adoption of special measures in the context of the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action (Palestine); 96.24. Continue investing in the breaking down of a culture of inequality, which was inherited from apartheid, from a human rights angle (Nicaragua); 96.25. Ensure that persons who only speak non-official languages used widely by the population are not denied access to public services (Austria); 96.26. Take effective measures to ensure the equal treatment of women in accordance with its international obligations under the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW) (Sweden); 1 	The recommendation as read during the interactive dialogue: Continue its policy of promoting and protecting the rights of vulnerable persons by consolidating it by further measures to ensure the full exercise of the rights of all components of the Namibian society while respecting its traditions and identity (Morocco);  96.27. Strengthen its legislation as well as promptly implement existing legislation, with a view to promote and protect women’s rights (Sweden); 96.28. Enhance the rights of women to civic participation (Turkey);  96.29. Increase measures to strengthen women's rights and combat stereotypes that can interfere with the enjoyment of women's fundamental rights (Morocco); 96.30. Continue its efforts to put a halt to all negative cultural practices and stereotypes that discriminate against women (Azerbaijan); 96.31. Continue its efforts to prevent, punish and eradicate all forms of violence against women as well overcoming stereotypes which provoke gender-based discrimination (Argentina); 96.32. That practices and traditional cultural customs are neither harmful to women, nor have a discriminatory impact, since during the Namibian struggle for national liberation women fought alongside and on par with men for the country's independence, and that they receive the necessary merit and attention in society (Angola);  96.33. Ensure that women in customary marriages enjoy the same rights as those in civil marriages (Austria); 96.34. Develop and implement, in cooperation with local customary authorities, a strategy to eliminate discriminatory traditional practices against women, including in respect of access to and ownership of land (Canada); 96.35. Promote a policy of equality and non-discrimination and that Namibia step up its efforts to reduce poverty with economic and social measures which ensure equal opportunity to citizens in the social, economic and political life of the country (Spain); 96.36. More efforts be made to combat gender violence, principally through the adoption of political measures to include the representation of women in decision-making-posts and in public administration (Spain); 96.37. Take effective measures to enhance the access to public services concerning persons who do not speak the official language (Germany); 96.38. Adopt measures to ensure access to public services for persons who do not speak English as they are a significant proportion of the Namibian population. This was recommended by the Human Rights Committee in 2004 (Spain); 96.39. Close cooperation with civil society, NGOs and the media in order to prevent harassment and threats against journalists, media organizations, human rights defenders and NGOs in the future (Norway); 96.40. Take steps to fully implement and enforce laws on violence against women and to ensure that victims were able to benefit from the existing legislative framework (South Africa); 96.41. Prioritize the elimination of discrimination and violence against women (Norway); 96.42. Apply fully the legislation geared towards combating discrimination and violence, particularly sexual, against women and young girls, particularly in terms of access of victims to justice and of training of magistrates, judges and police regarding this problem (France); 96.43. Move forward quickly with a national action plan to combat gender-based violence, including human trafficking (United States of America);  96.44. Implement standard procedures to identify victims and provide them with protection, conduct national anti-trafficking public awareness campaigns, and incorporate anti-human trafficking training into its police training curriculum (United States of America);  96.45. Improve the living conditions and infrastructure of detention facilities in the country (Italy); 96.46. For the purposes of fully protecting the human rights of all Namibians, secessionists be pursued and be brought to book (Zimbabwe);  96.47. Undertake steps to guarantee that trials take place within a reasonable period of time, and that special measures be taken to address the backlog of criminal cases (Austria); 96.48. Continue its efforts to ensure that trials take place within a reasonable period of time (Slovakia); 96.49. Take immediate measures to address the capacity issues faced by security and justice sectors, including reducing the amount of time it takes for court cases to be heard (United Kingdom); 96.50. Investigate the cases and assess the possibility of making improvements to the facilities in local prisons (Norway); 96.51. Take measures to safeguard the human rights of prisoners, and to separate juvenile and adult prisoners (Sweden); 96.52. The existing women’s and children units in the country which are staffed with police officers be strengthened with sufficient human and logistical resources (Ghana); 96.53. Conduct thorough and impartial investigation into all allegations of discrimination against women (Sweden); 96.54. Investigate reports of forced or coerced sterilization in HIV-positive women and that it takes steps to ensure women are educated about the effects of sterilization and options available to them (United Kingdom); 96.55. Take effective measures to encourage the registration of customary marriages and to grant the spouses and children of registered customary marriages the same rights as those married under civil law (Portugal); 96.56. Take effective measures to safeguard freedom of expression for individuals and the media (Sweden); 96.57. Continue its efforts to promote economic, social and cultural rights and initiate national policies to guarantee the rights of its people and create a conducive environment for socio-economic development (Nigeria); 96.58. Strengthen measures to combat AIDS and if necessary seek the assistance of the World Health Organization (Morocco); 96.59. Continue its efforts to combat HIV/AIDS (Pakistan); 96.60. Issue clear directives to all health officials prohibiting the sterilization of women living with HIV/AIDS without their informed consent (Canada);  96.61. Promote, in a comprehensive manner, sexual education, particularly of adolescents, with special attention to the prevention of early pregnancy and sexually transmitted diseases and HIV/AIDS (Mexico); 96.62. Seek financial and technical assistance necessary to meet the challenges identified by the World Food Programme, namely the persistent food deficits, recurring drought and high malnutrition rates (Morocco); 96.63. Expand micro-credit and financing schemes, with a view to expanding the formal economy in the country and gradually reducing the inequality in income distribution (Malaysia); 96.64. Take effective measures to ensure that all women have access to adequate health facilities (Germany); 96.65. Increase efforts to reduce poverty and stimulate development of the most marginalized groups, particularly indigenous communities, involving them in the decisions regarding their rights and interests (Mexico); 96.66. Take all the necessary measures to ensure women have access to adequate health-care services, including sexual and reproductive health services (Slovenia); 96.67. Ensure access to education, employment, health care and other basic services for the members of all ethnic communities, including the San and Himba communities (Slovenia); 96.68. Continue its education policy, giving special emphasis to the education of young girls (Niger); 96.69. Take all necessary measures to eradicate discrimination against indigenous peoples (France); 96.70. Formulate a white paper in accordance with the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples  and that recommendations from the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, the International Labour Organization (ILO) and the African Commission’s Working Group on Indigenous Populations/Communities are taken into consideration in this process (Norway); 96.71. Consider requesting assistance from the international community to facilitate the implementation of its obligations in the protection and promotion of human rights (Uganda); 96.72. Continue to seek international assistance to sustain its efforts aimed at the promotion and protection of human rights, in line with its national policies (Nigeria). 97.  The following recommendations enjoy the support of Namibia which considers that they have already been implemented or are in the process of implementation: 97.1. Review the law on equality of spouses in order to eliminate discrimination against women in customary marriages in relation to property rights, so that the rights recognized in customary marriages are the same as in civil marriages (Mexico);  97.2. Explore the possibility of strengthening the institutional and operational capacity of the Office of the Ombudsman by allocating human and financial resources (Malaysia); 97.3. Provide the Office of the Ombudsman with the necessary financial and human resources so that it can implement its action plan (Niger); 97.4. Continue pursuing appropriate policies, such as the Action Programme to Eliminate Child Labour in Namibia 2008-2012, in particular with regard to ILO Convention No. 182 concerning the Prohibition and Immediate Action for the Elimination of the Worst Forms of Child Labour, to address the phenomenon of child labour (Slovakia); 97.5. Implement further policies to ensure gender equality throughout society and strengthen the promotion of the rights of women (South Africa); 97.6. Continue to prioritize the education and health sectors in its development plans (Singapore); 97.7. Develop a National Plan of Action on eliminating violence against women and strengthen efforts to fulfil its obligations under CEDAW (Australia); 97.8. Consider undertaking measures that promote gender equality and the rights of women in the internal normative framework (Chile); 97.9. Continue its efforts to prevent, punish and eradicate violence against boys and girls (Argentina); 97.10. Allocate the resources necessary for the full implementation of the “Zero Tolerance Campaign against Gender Based Violence, Including Human Trafficking”, and ensure engagement at the highest political level in the campaign to highlight the unacceptability of violence against women and address the attitudes and stereotypes that perpetuate discriminatory practices that are harmful and violent toward women (Canada); 97.11. Increase its efforts to combat violence against women and children (Germany); 97.12. Consider continuing increasing allocation of more resources to the sectors of education, health and employment (Zimbabwe);  97.13. Continue applying programmes and measures to improve the enjoyment of the right to education and the right to health, including addressing the HIV/AIDs pandemic (Cuba); 97.14. Give top priority to reducing further the national prevalence rate [of HIV/AIDS], especially among pregnant women (Algeria); 97.15. Maintain and further build upon its HIV/AIDS preventive, care and treatment programmes (Singapore); 97.16. Adopt a systematic approach to prevent mother-to-child transmission of HIV (Turkey); 97.17. Explore the feasibility of establishing a network of mobile clinics in order to reach out to the widely dispersed population (Malaysia); 97.18. Continue towards providing safe drinking water in the inhabited areas (Sudan); 98.  The following recommendations will be examined by Namibia which will provide responses in due time, but no later than the seventeenth session of the Human Rights Council in June 2011: 98.1. Consider ratifying all outstanding international instruments to which it is not yet party and endeavour to domesticate them in its national legislation (Nigeria); 98.2. Become a party to the outstanding core international human rights treaties (Austria); 98.3. Ratify the following international instruments: the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of their Families (CMW), the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearances (CED), OP-CAT and the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (OP-ICESCR) (Ecuador); 98.4.  Sign and ratify OP-CAT (Sweden);   98.5.  Should ratify CMW (Zambia);  98.6.  Ratify CMW (Burkina Faso);  98.7.  Consider, in its spirit of commitment, the possibility of acceding to  CMW (Algeria); 98.8. Accede to OP-CAT, and incorporate this into domestic law (Australia); 98.9. Sign and ratify OP-CAT (United Kingdom); 98.10. Sign and ratify OP-CAT and put in place an independent national mechanism for the inspection of places of deprivation of liberty (France);  98.11. Consider becoming a party to OP-CAT (Uganda); 98.12. Consider signing and ratifying OP-CAT (Mauritius); 98.13. Sign and ratify CED, as it constitutes an important instrument for the prevention against torture (France); 98.14. Sign and ratify OP-ICESCR as soon as possible, allowing individual complaints of alleged violations of these rights to be heard by the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (Portugal); 98.15. Sign and ratify OP-ICESCR, OP-CAT and CED (Spain); 98.16. Become a party to OP-ICESCR, OP-CAT, CMW and CED (Argentina); 98.17. Review the reservation to article 26 of the Refugee Convention to authorize the free movement and residence of persons with recognized refugee status and to also extend this to asylum seekers (Ecuador);  98.18. Ratify the 1954 Convention relating to the Status of Stateless Persons and the 1961 Convention on the Reduction of Statelessness (Slovakia);  98.19. Sign and ratify the Conventions and Protocols to which it is not a party (Niger); 98.20. Assess the possibility of extending an invitation to the United Nation special procedures, with thanks for the information provided regarding the invitation to the Independent Expert on the issue of human rights obligations related to access to safe drinking water and sanitation (Chile); 98.21. Should extend standing invitations to the special procedures mandate holders (Zambia); 98.22. Extend an open and standing invitation to the special procedures of the Human Rights Council and be proactive when questionnaires are sent by mandate holders (Ecuador); 98.23. Consider extending a standing invitation to all special procedures of the Human Rights Council (Latvia); 98.24. Amend the labour law to address the inconsistency with regard to the minimum age to work and the school age for compulsory education, as well as more vigorously enforce the labour laws related to child labour (United States of America); 98.25. Review its legislation on communications and bring it in line with international standards (Sweden); 98.26. Strengthen measures to end discrimination, exclusion and marginalization of indigenous groups and minorities, in particular the San people (Austria); 98.27. Guarantee non-discrimination against persons belonging to minorities (Spain); 99.  The following recommendations below did not enjoy the support of Namibia. 99.1. Revoke the law which criminalizes consensual, non-commercial adult homosexual conduct, as it violates the rights to privacy, and the protection against discrimination (Portugal); 99.2. Abrogate all laws prohibiting consensual sexual relations between adults of the same sex (France); 99.3. Legislative measures be adopted to decriminalize consensual sexual relations between adults of the same sex including a provision on the prohibition of discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation or on gender identity (Spain); 100. All conclusions and/or recommendations contained in the present report reflect the position of the submitting State(s) and/or the State under review. They should not be construed as endorsed by the Working Group as a whole. Annex Composition of the delegation The delegation of Namibia was headed by Hon. Pendukeni Iivula-Ithana, MP, Minister and composed of the following members: • Mr. Issaskar Ndjoze- Deputy Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Justice- Alternate; • Mr. Simon Madjumo Maruta- Chargé d'Affaires, Permanent Mission of Namibia to UNOG;  • Ms. Elisabeth N. Negumbo, Chief of Immigration, Ministry of Home Affairs and Immigration; • Ms. Gladice Pickering- Deputy Chief, Ministry of Justice; • Mr. Tertius Ndevaetela- Deputy Commissioner of Police, Ministry of Safety and Security; • Mr. Christiaan Horn, Deputy Director, Ministry of Labour and Social Welfare; • Mr. Gerson Kamatuka, Deputy Director, Office of the Prime Minister; • Mr. Theodore Grunewald, Deputy Director, Ministry of Foreign Affairs; • Ms. Albertina Iipinge, Deputy Director, Ministry of Lands and Resettlement; • Mr. Cedric Limbo-	 Chief: Health Programmes, Ministry of Health and Social Services; • Ms. Sophia T. Peter, Chief Development Planner Legislation, Ministry of Gender, Equality and Child Welfare; • Mr. Basilius Dyakugha, Principal Legal Officer, Ministry of Justice; • Mr. Jackson 	Eixab, Principal Legal Officer, Office of the Prosecutor-General, Ministry of Justice; • Mr. David Sampson, Education Officer, Ministry of Education; • Mr. Absalom Nghifitikeko,	 First Secretary, Permanent Mission of Namibia to UNOG; • Ms. Selma Nghinamundova, First Secretary, Permanent Mission of Namibia 	to UNOG; • Ms. Violette Isaacs, Personal Assistant to the Minister of Justice; • Ms. Johanna Salomo, Third Secretary, Permanent Mission of Namibia to UNOG. 