Distr.: General 11 July 2011 English Original: English/French General Assembly Human Rights Council Eighteenth session Agenda item 6 Universal Periodic Review Report of the Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review* Belgium * The annex to the present report is circulated as received. Contents 
Paragraphs Page Introduction............................................................................................................. 1–4 3 
I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process................................................ 5–99 3 
A. Presentation by the State under review........................................................... 5–13 3 
B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review........................ 14–99 4 
II. Conclusions and/or recommendations .................................................................... 100–104 13  Annex Composition of the delegation ......................................................................................................... 22 Introduction 1. The Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review (UPR), established in accordance with Human Rights Council resolution 5/1 of 18 June 2007, held its eleventh session from 2 to 13 May 2011. The review of Belgium was held at the 1st meeting on 2 May 2011. The delegation of Belgium was headed by Steven Vanackere, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Foreign Affairs. At its 5th meeting, held on 4 May 2011, the Working Group adopted the report on Belgium. 2. On 21 June 2010, the Human Rights Council selected the following group of rapporteurs (troika) to facilitate the review of Belgium: Cuba, Japan and Nigeria. 3. In accordance with paragraph 15 of the annex to resolution 5/1, the following documents were issued for the review of Belgium: (a) A national report submitted/written presentation made in accordance with paragraph 15 (a) (A/HRC/WG.6/11/BEL/1); (b) A compilation prepared by OHCHR in accordance with paragraph 15 (b) (A/HRC/WG.6/11/BEL/2); (c) A summary prepared by OHCHR in accordance with paragraph 15 (c) (A/HRC/WG.6/11/BEL/3).  4. A list of questions prepared in advance by the Czech Republic, Denmark, France, the Netherlands, Norway, Slovenia, Sweden and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland was transmitted to Belgium through the troika. These questions are available on the extranet of the UPR. I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process A. Presentation by the State under review 5. In introducing the presentation, Steven Vanackere, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs, stressed the importance that Belgium attached to human rights and the universal periodic review. 6. Belgium was a federal State structured in such a way that responsibility for the full realization of human rights was shared among different levels of authority: the federal State, the Communities and the Regions. The fact that Belgium had three official languages enhanced its cultural wealth but sometimes posed practical problems. Those aspects of the national situation needed to be borne in mind in order to properly evaluate the action taken by the Belgian authorities in regard to human rights.  7. Belgium considered that, on balance, the outcome of its human rights efforts was positive. Fundamental rights were enshrined in the Constitution and upheld in practice. There was, of course, still room for improvement.  8. Belgium was already party to the main international human rights treaties, and it was on the way to ratifying several other treaties as well. 9. The creation of a national human rights institution in accordance with the Paris Principles was under consideration. 10. Specific legislative and other measures had been taken to combat all forms of discrimination, including discrimination on the grounds of gender, the national concept of “race”, religion, sexual orientation and disability. 11. Women’s and children’s rights were also an important concern, as reflected in the launch of a national reform programme which included measures to promote gender equality in the labour market and in the recent establishment of a parliamentary commission to investigate the sexual abuse of minors in the Church. 12. The Minister described at some length the problems associated with prison overcrowding and the shortage of facilities for asylum-seekers, as well as the action being taken to resolve those problems. 13. He concluded by stressing that Belgium’s national report had been drawn up in close cooperation with civil society. B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review 14. During the interactive dialogue, 49 delegations made statements. Recommendations made during the dialogue are to be found in section II of the present report. A number of delegations welcomed the participative approach in drafting the national report and the commitment showed by Belgium to the UPR mechanism 15. India took positive note of initiatives mentioned in the national report. It inquired about steps taken to address concerns regarding discrimination against foreigners and minorities; the observation that foreigners received more severe sentences in the penal system; the lack of official recognition of minorities and the lack of a provision declaring illegal organizations that incite racial discrimination; and a restrictive definition of child pornography. India made a recommendation. 16. Algeria welcomed the launch of a National Action Plan against Racism and congratulated Belgium for its efforts towards the ratification of most international human rights instruments. It inquired why the 59 measures included in its federal plan to combat poverty did not succeed in improving the situation. Algeria made recommendations. 17. Canada stated that Belgium could make further improvements to combat sexual exploitation of children. Canada also believed that Belgium should continue its action to combat violence against women. It was aware of the concerns raised by the Human Rights Commissioner of the Council of Europe and the European Commission over racism and intolerance, particularly discrimination based on language in the Flemish region. Canada made recommendations.  18. The Republic of Moldova welcomed the activities of the Centre for Equal Opportunity and Action to Combat Racism. It recalled that the Committee on the Rights of the Child encouraged Belgium to pursue its international cooperation aimed at preventing and punishing sexual exploitation of children. It welcomed the establishment of the National Commission for the Rights of the Child and recalled the recommendations by the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women on gender equality. The Republic of Moldova made recommendations. 19. The Russian Federation stated that the information collected by the United Nations demonstrated the concerns of treaty bodies regarding racist/anti-Semitic activities and statements of an Islamophobic nature. There was also a dimension of discrimination against foreigners and representatives of national and ethnic minorities, migrant workers and members of their families, members of Muslim societies and the Roma. The Russian Federation made recommendations. 20. Hungary welcomed the timely submission by Belgium of its reports to treaty bodies. While asking for the implementation of the national action plan for children, it noted with satisfaction the constitutional provisions on children’s rights. Hungary referred to the importance of language diversity and was concerned that health workers remained unaware of legal provisions prohibiting female genital mutilation. Hungary made recommendations. 21. The Czech Republic appreciated the measures adopted by Belgium to enhance its legal and institutional mechanisms aimed at combating racial discrimination. However, it noted that de facto discrimination against persons belonging to ethnic and national minorities, in particular migrant workers and members of their families, still existed among some sectors of the population. The Czech Republic made recommendations. 22. Austria asked what additional measures had been adopted regarding reports of excessive use of force by the police. It also requested information on the Master Plan to improve conditions of detention and on the timeline for the adoption and implementation of the national action plan against domestic violence 2010–2014. Austria made recommendations.  23. France inquired on deadlines relating to the ratification of various international human rights instruments. It recalled that the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination noted that Belgian law did not provide for disbanding organizations inciting racial hatred. France mentioned the proposals made by a Parliamentary Commission of Inquiry in its report on sexual abuse against children in March 2011. France made recommendations. 24. Thailand commended Belgium for its commitment to promote and protect human rights for all, particularly the vulnerable groups. Thailand noted its efforts to strengthen its penal system and administration of justice. Thailand appreciated its active role in the humanitarian field and welcomed its action plan to combat trafficking in persons, in addition to its support to the activities of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. Thailand made recommendations.  25. Estonia noted that Belgium was party to all main human rights instruments and fully cooperated with special procedures. It encouraged Belgium to continue efforts to combat domestic violence. Estonia asked for additional information on poverty reduction and inquired whether the situation of low-income groups had improved with the implementation of the Federal Poverty Reduction plan. It also asked about the process of the ratification of OPCAT. 26. The United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland referred to the positive contribution to the human rights situation of the establishment of a national human rights institution. It inquired as to how Belgium will address the situation of asylum-seekers who did not enjoy their right to housing and the child protection gaps in its legislation. It noted the absence of comprehensive legislation to protect women from domestic abuse and the resurgence of anti-Semitic and racist acts. The United Kingdom made recommendations. 27. Poland appreciated Belgium’s commitment to cooperation with the United Nations special procedures and the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights. Poland welcomed numerous developments in the legal and institutional system. Poland, however, referred to the finding of the Committee on the Rights of the Child that there were still areas where further steps should be taken in order to ensure children’s rights. Poland made recommendations. 28. Slovenia asked for information on the implementation of the second phase of the World Programme for Human Rights Education. It also asked about followup to the recommendations of the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights to officially recognize the need to protect the cultural diversity of minorities and consider ratifying the Council of Europe Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities. Slovenia made a recommendation. 29. Egypt inquired about any visits by special procedures to be organised. While recognizing the legal apparatus to combat racism and xenophobia and that the fight against racism was among Belgium’s priorities, Egypt expressed concerns at the lack of specific provisions prohibiting the promotion and incitement to racial discrimination. Egypt expressed concern over the federal implementation of policies addressing child sexual exploitation and over the ban on headscarves in schools. Egypt made recommendations. 30. Afghanistan welcomed the establishment of the National Commission for the Rights of the Child in 2005 and steps taken to promote equal opportunities and combat racism. It took note that some challenges in the fields of the Rights of the Child and gender equality still remained on the ground. Afghanistan asked what further measures Belgium took to combat racism. Afghanistan made recommendations. 31. Indonesia welcomed the fact that a monitoring mechanism to forcible removals was being developed and that efforts were being made to increase the number and quality of facilities for asylum-seekers. It also commended efforts to combat racism, in particular through action by the Centre for Equal Opportunity and Action to Combat Racism. Indonesia made recommendations.  32. While commending Belgium on the adoption of an action plan to combat trafficking in human beings, Germany asked how Belgium had followed up on the recommendations by the Human Rights Committee to address the insufficient means to assist victims of trafficking. Germany also inquired on how Belgium followed up on the Committee on the Rights of the Child’s recommendation on the state of health of children from the most disadvantaged families and on punishing corporal punishment. 33. Sweden welcomed the positive developments regarding refugees and asylum-seekers in Belgium. It, however, noted the poor conditions in closed centres for migrants and the occurrence of use of excessive force during expulsion of migrants. Sweden asked Belgium to elaborate on further measures to enhance the conditions for asylum-seekers and migrants. It also asked Belgium to elaborate on the question of prison overcrowding. Sweden made recommendations. 34. Portugal referred to the observations of the Committee on the Rights of the Child on female genital mutilation and the fact that the law prohibiting this practice remained largely unknown. It asked about steps taken to raise awareness and combat the practice. Portugal noted that a national human rights commission had not yet been established. It made recommendations. 35. Belgium reported that the possibility of creating a national human rights institution was under consideration and that existing specialized human rights mechanisms were being analysed with that aim in mind.  36. Belgium was on the verge of ratifying the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance and had begun the process of ratifying the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights. Belgium was not in a position to ratify the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families because that instrument conferred the same rights on undocumented migrant workers as on documented ones, which contravened European and national migration policies. 37. Belgium looked forward to ratifying the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture. As to the establishment of a national preventive mechanism, Belgium was exploring the possibility of expanding the mandate of one of its existing institutions, among other options. 38. When Belgium had signed the Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities of the Council of Europe, it had made a reservation with a view to subsequently defining the term “national minority”. No such definition had been agreed upon in Belgium as yet, however. 39. Belgium stood ready to re-examine its declarations and reservations regarding international human rights instruments in order to determine whether they were still pertinent and justified and, if they were found not to be, to withdraw them.  40. Three laws against racism, discrimination and denial of the Holocaust, together with the 2004 National Plan of Action, formed the mainstays of the fight against discrimination and against the incitement of hatred. Belgium had stepped up its efforts to combat xenophobia, anti-Semitism and Islamophobia. Measures taken to that end included the establishment of monitoring and surveillance units, the creation of a cyberhate crimes unit and the prosecution of offenders in the courts.  41. Political parties could not be banned under Belgian law and did not have legal personality. Members of political parties could be prosecuted, however, for acts of violence or discrimination and for inciting hatred. Parties could also be denied public funding, and their individual associations could be dissolved. 42. There were no legal provisions either prohibiting or authorizing the use of veils in schools. Schools were free to incorporate provisions on the subject into their own rules in line with their particular educational philosophy. Parents’ freedom of choice was guaranteed both de jure and de facto. 43. With a prison occupancy rate of 118 per cent, Belgium definitely had a problem with overcrowding, especially in the case of persons being held in pretrial detention. A number of measures were being taken to address the situation: new prisons had been opened; some prisoners had been temporarily moved to facilities that had been leased in the Netherlands; non-custodial alternatives, early-release programmes, electronic monitoring and limited sentences were being used; and international agreements were being entered into on the transfer of inmates to their country of origin.  44. Since 2000, Belgium had repealed an article that had allowed minors to be held in prison for up to 15 days. Minors aged 16 or over could be tried as adults only for serious crimes in cases where the regulations on the protection of young people were inapplicable. Under-age offenders were held in closed centres where they received special support.  45. A sharp increase in demand had overwhelmed the reception facilities for asylum-seekers. Between 2007 and 2011, the number of people seeking asylum had risen by approximately 120 per cent. Over the same period, Belgium had increased the capacity of its reception facilities by almost 50 per cent. 46. Any excessive use of force by police officers in prisons, whether during the expulsion of foreigners or in any other case, was punished by means of the application of disciplinary and judicial measures. Police behaviour was overseen by the legislature (through the Standing Committee on the Supervision of Police Services (Committee P)), the judiciary and the executive (through the General Inspectorate of Federal and Local Police). 47. Belarus stated that it had positively assessed the broad scale of obligations undertaken by Belgium under international human rights treaties. Belarus, however, noted the low level of cooperation between the special procedures and Belgium, especially in answering to their questionnaires. Belgium had answered only five out of 26 questionnaires. Belarus made recommendations. 48. Mexico commended efforts made to protect human rights in the country. It particularly noted budgetary measures adopted to speed up the justice system, to promote the participation of women in the public life, and the full cooperation with special procedures. It also noted that some challenges still existed, in particular in the fields of non.discrimination and inclusion of minorities. Mexico made recommendations.  49. Pakistan noted that the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination expressed concerns in 2008 that Belgium had not adopted any legislation to implement Article 4 of the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination. Pakistan wished to know how it intended to check activities of these racist organizations that might be detrimental to the efforts to build a tolerant society. Pakistan made recommendations. 50. The United States of America commended Belgium for proposing measures to combat employment discrimination but mentioned reported discrimination against members of ethnic minorities and de facto discrimination against migrant workers, members of the Muslim community and Roma. It expressed concern over conditions in prisons and detention facilities. The United States made recommendations. 51. The Islamic Republic of Iran expressed its concerns over a number of human rights issues, including the increase in Islamophobic remarks; multiple discrimination faced by Muslim girls resulting from the ban of headscarves in schools; de facto discrimination against certain foreigners and persons belonging to ethnic and national minorities; the high number of child abuse cases; ill-treatment of detainees by prison staff, prison overcrowding, and the lack of adequate prison healthcare. The Islamic Republic of Iran made recommendations. 52. Australia noted the challenges faced by Belgium, including prison overcrowding and excessive use of force by the police. It welcomed the action plan to combat human trafficking and commended the ratification of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and its Optional Protocol in 2009. Australia also welcomed efforts to combat racism and to promote gender equality. It encouraged Belgium to establish a national human rights commission. Australia made recommendations.    53. Argentina congratulated Belgium for measures that were being implemented to improve the situation of minorities as well as other measures on human rights issues. It made a recommendation. 54. The Netherlands noted that gender equality was an issue and expressed its interest in the quotas established in 2002. It expressed concerns over the slow judiciary system and regional discrepancies in the way justice was administered and noted the measures which had been introduced in this respect. It echoed concerns of the Committee on the Rights of the Child over trade in war material in regions where children took part in hostilities. The Netherlands made recommendations. 55. Norway commended Belgium for its efforts in children’s rights, combating of racism, gender equality, and the rights of lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender people, and for incorporating human rights in the Constitution. Although Belgium reacted swiftly during the asylum crisis this winter and improved the situation of asylum-seekers living on the streets, Norway had concerns over Belgium’s lack of structural capacity in receiving asylum seekers. Norway made recommendations.  56. Spain asked whether Belgium had the intention to follow up on and avoid as much as possible measures that impose obligations concerning language as a condition to accede to social benefits related to housing. It also inquired if Belgium had the intention to elaborate an action plan for the promotion and protection of human rights. Spain made recommendations. 57. Uzbekistan recalled the treaty bodies’ concerns over discrimination against women and gender inequalities, notably relating to female migrants and women belonging to minorities. It also mentioned the lack of provisions criminalizing organisations promoting racial discrimination and the spread of Islamophobia in the press and by political parties. Uzbekistan referred to the draft proposal to prohibit neo-Nazi demonstrations. Uzbekistan made recommendations. 58. Japan commended Belgium for its active commitment to human rights promotion and expected that it would continue to implement measures in accordance with its international obligations. Japan welcomed Belgium’s efforts on gender equality but expressed concerns over persistent unequal treatment. Japan welcomed the steps being taken to address racial discrimination but echoed concerns by the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination. Japan made recommendations. 59. Brazil expressed concern over the persistence of hate speech and the resurgence of racist acts. It noted that differences between men and women persisted, particularly in the labour market. Brazil also noted that domestic violence persists and that comprehensive legislation in this regard has not yet been adopted. It encouraged Belgium to pursue action to raise awareness of its past shared with Africa. Brazil made recommendations. 60. The Democratic Republic of the Congo welcomed national human rights policies regarding civil, political, economic, social and cultural rights. It noted with regret the increase of racial discrimination and intolerance towards foreigners and echoed concerns over the conditions of detention of irregular migrants. It also mentioned the absence of a Government for a long period and inquired about results achieved by the Centre for Equal Opportunity and Action to Combat Racism. It made recommendations. 61. Belgium repeated its open standing invitation to all special procedures.  62. Belgium confirmed that the procedure for giving Buddhism the status of a recognized religion should be completed in 2012.  63. While it was true that corporal punishment was not a specific offence under Belgian law, a number of criminal provisions were directly applicable to acts of that nature. There were also a number of preventive, warning and assistance mechanisms in place to protect children. 64. Belgium had ratified the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography and had submitted its initial report on the implementation of the Protocol to the Committee on the Rights of the Child in June 2010. The Protocol was being implemented both at the federal level and at the level of the Communities and Regions.  65. The National Commission on the Rights of the Child was responsible for the follow-up and implementation of the recommendations of the Committee on the Rights of the Child. 66. Since 2003, the federal authorities, civil society and public and private enterprises had been working together to prevent the prostitution of children abroad. Awareness-raising campaigns against the sexual exploitation of children had been launched.  67. Belgian law prohibited the export of weapons to countries that recruited child soldiers. Belgium had proposed the inclusion of a specific reference to the issue of child soldiers in the international arms treaty currently being negotiated. 68. The effort to combat violence against women was a priority for both the police and the judiciary. Although conjugal violence was not a specific offence under the Criminal Code, Belgian law had a comprehensive set of criminal provisions for combating it. In 2010, Belgium had adopted the National Plan of Action against Domestic Violence, whose expanded scope of action includes genital mutilation, “honour crimes” and forced marriages. 69. Special instruction on the subject of female genital mutilation was provided to health and early-childhood workers. 70. Participation by both men and women in all branches of the executive, at the federal, regional and local levels, was provided for in the Belgian Constitution. The percentage of women in elected office had risen after the regional elections of 2009 and the federal elections of 2010.  71. Belgium was grateful that Norway and Spain had brought up the issue of the rights of lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender people. Belgium was very active in promoting their rights at both the national and international levels.  72. The national poverty rate stood at 15 per cent, and a statistical tool, the annual “poverty barometer”, had been introduced. Belgium was working to combat poverty and aimed to reduce the number of persons at risk of poverty by 380,000 by 2020. 73. The Belgian Constitution and several other Belgian laws guaranteed equal treatment for persons with disabilities and protected them against discrimination. Complaints were handled by the Centre for Equal Opportunities and Opposition to Racism. Belgium had ratified the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and the Optional Protocol to the Convention and would be presenting its initial report that summer.  74. Despite improvements on the legislative front and the preventive action that had been taken, discrimination persisted, especially against the Roma. A national strategy for the inclusion of the Roma was needed to address the problem.  75. Palestine noted that Belgium had given attention to the respect of asylum-seekers’ and aliens’ rights, in addition to their integration in the society. Since 1981, Belgium formulated a legal framework to combat racism and xenophobia as well as the law that repressed racially motivated acts. Palestine called upon Belgium to continue and intensify its efforts to protect human rights. Palestine made recommendations. 76. Morocco welcomed the measures adopted for the protection of migrants and inquired about efforts made to promote their integration. It also inquired as to the composition and mandate of the Centre for Equal Opportunity and Action to Combat Racism. Morocco welcomed the legal apparatus to promote the freedom of religion and noted with satisfaction efforts made on human rights education. Morocco asked for more information regarding the 2009 Diversity Charter signed by the police. Morocco made a recommendation. 77. Chile expressed appreciation for the active participation of civil society in the elaboration of the national report. It also highlighted that human rights education, tolerance, gender equality, and the respect for diversity were an integral part of the educational system’s programmes. Chile made recommendations. 78. Nigeria acknowledged Belgium’s recognition of the importance of respecting the rights of migrants. Nigeria also noted the steps taken by Belgium to combat unemployment and increase labour force participation. Nigeria was, however, concerned at the marginal role retained by the Aliens Office for deciding on asylum applications and noted that the Council for Alien Disputes did not have investigative powers. Nigeria made recommendations. 79. Ecuador expressed appreciation for the importance given by Belgium to the UPR process, its constructive participation in the process and the broad consultations undertaken within the country, which demonstrate the importance of human rights in the country’s public agenda. Ecuador made recommendations.  80. Slovakia highlighted the exemplary cooperation of Belgium with regional and international human rights mechanisms and commended Belgium for dedicating a great deal of resources to protecting the rights of migrants. It also commended Belgium’s efforts in improving the living conditions in its penitentiary facilities. Slovakia made recommendations. 81. Turkey attached importance to the finding of the National Institute of Criminal Statistics and Criminology that foreigners in the penal system received more severe sentences than people of Belgian origin. It welcomed the ongoing public debate regarding the establishment of an independent national human rights institution. It also shared its concerns over discrimination in accessing the labour market. Turkey made a recommendation. 82. South Africa inquired about steps taken to address concerns expressed by CERD over the lack of specific provisions declaring illegal and prohibiting organizations promoting racial discrimination. It also noted that the Human Rights Committee had expressed concerns about the resurgence of anti-Semitic and racist acts. South Africa thanked Belgium for the positive role it played during the World Conference Against Racism and made recommendations. 83. Burkina Faso welcomed Belgium’s commitment for the promotion and protection of human rights and its standing cooperation with special procedures. Burkina Faso remained open to share experience and best practices with Belgium. Burkina Faso encouraged Belgium to consolidate its human rights promotion policy and made recommendations. 84. Malaysia commended Belgium for being a party to a significant number of human rights instruments. It noted that several treaty bodies had made observations on issues related to racism and racial discrimination and inquired whether Belgium intended to follow up on those recommendations to curb the spread of racial hatred and related phenomenon and to strengthen measures to prevent and combat xenophobia and racial prejudice. Malaysia made recommendations. 85. Bangladesh recalled that Belgium hosted the Third United Nations Conference on Least Developed Countries (LDC III) in 2001. It noted that that the commitment made during the 2001 Brussels Programme of Action for LDCs and the committed net Official Development Assistance up to 0.7 per cent of GDP had not been fully realized. Bangladesh also noted concerns by treaty bodies regarding discrimination based on race, religion and incidents of hate speech. Bangladesh made recommendations. 86. Djibouti noted the contribution of Belgium to the consolidation of the Human Rights Council. Djibouti made recommendations. 87. China commended Belgium on its progress in eradicating poverty and ensuring the right to housing and education. It also noted the efforts made in promoting gender equality, ensuring the rights of migrants, and eradicating racial discrimination. China asked Belgium to elaborate on the specific measures for the right to housing and education to be enjoyed equally by the Roma and other minority groups. 88. Kyrgyzstan welcomed the amendments to the Constitution, which guaranteed the best interests of the child and gender equality, abolished the death penalty and guaranteed protection for foreigners commensurate with that afforded to Belgian nationals. Kyrgyzstan made recommendations. 89. Guatemala highlighted the emphasis given to the best interests of the child and the guarantees of the right to education and medical assistance. It requested information on measures adopted for the integration of foreigners so as to attain an intercultural and cohesive society. It urged Belgium to refrain from making distinctions between regular and irregular migrants. It also urged the establishment of a national human rights mechanism. Guatemala made a recommendation. 90. Freedom of religion and freedom of expression were protected under the Belgian Constitution. Islam had been a recognized religion in Belgium since 1974. Belgium had a wide array of legislative weapons for combating discrimination and hate crimes that were committed on the basis of religious or philosophical beliefs, and those provisions were effectively applied by the courts. A report issued by the Centre for Equal Opportunities and Opposition to Racism, which monitored cases of Islamophobia, showed that 13 per cent of all cases of discrimination involved religion and, of those, 40 per cent involved Islamophobia. 91. The Centre for Equal Opportunities and Opposition to Racism had three areas of action: discrimination, migration and poverty reduction. The Centre pursued its goals by organizing awareness-raising and training activities, following up on individual complaints and issuing opinions and recommendations. 92. The assistance provided to asylum-seekers and other categories of aliens was regulated by a law passed in 2007 which was designed to ensure that all persons should be able to lead a dignified life. The law also stipulated that material assistance should be provided for the duration of asylum procedures, together with medical, psychological, social and legal assistance. Special assistance was to be afforded to vulnerable persons, such as torture victims, older adults and unaccompanied minors. The latter benefited from a special intake programme.  93. Since 1 October 2008, accommodation in residential facilities instead of closed detention centres had been made available to families. 94. Asylum-seekers were not systematically detained in Belgium: at border crossings, only those aliens who did not meet entry requirements were taken into custody. 95. Human rights principles were covered in the special training programmes provided for judges and the forces of law and order, including the police and members of the Armed Forces. The Communities had also taken steps to include human rights education in school curricula. 96. Human trafficking was broadly defined in the Criminal Code to cover all acts of trafficking in persons for the purposes of sexual exploitation, begging, organ trafficking or forced criminal activity. The 2008 National Plan of Action included various measures to prevent trafficking and punish traffickers. The protection of children formed an integral part of the fight against human trafficking. Belgium had signed police cooperation agreements on human trafficking and human smuggling with States of origin and States in which trafficking took place. 97. Primary and secondary schooling was free, and there were no direct fees. The Communities had taken steps to reduce indirect expenses (such as the cost of textbooks and materials) and to provide financial assistance for schoolchildren who needed it.  98. Despite budget constraints, the amount of official development assistance provided by Belgium had reached a record high of 0.64 per cent of gross domestic product (GDP) in 2010, largely on account of its cancellation of the debt of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. That figure was projected to fall to 0.57 per cent of GDP in 2011 given the smaller amount of debts still to be cancelled. 99. Belgium was grateful to all the delegations that had participated in the interactive dialogue. The universal periodic review would undoubtedly serve as a valuable tool for the development of future human rights policies. The process was just beginning. Belgium would submit a progress report, in 2013, on the implementation of the recommendations that it supported and would involve civil society in the follow-up to the review.  II. Conclusions and/or recommendations 100. The recommendations formulated during the interactive dialogue listed below have been examined by Belgium and enjoy the support of Belgium: 100.1. Ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (Czech Republic, United Kingdom, Norway, Spain, Brazil, Ecuador); 100.2. Consider ratification of the Optional Protocols to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (Palestine); 100.3. Ratify the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (Spain, Brazil); consider ratifying the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights as recommended by the CRC (South Africa); 100.4. Consider withdrawing its reservations to various instruments to which it is a party (South Africa); 100.5. Ratify Additional Protocol III to the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949 (Democratic Republic of Congo); 100.6. Accede to the Optional Protocols to the Convention against Torture, to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and to the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons Enforced Disappearance, as recommended by certain treaty bodies (Ecuador); 100.7. Condemn any manifestation of racism, discrimination, xenophobia and Islamophobia in political statements and pursue its efficient measures to combat these phenomena in official and media sectors and within the public at large (Algeria); 100.8. Promote freedom of all religions, including by passing laws to give Buddhism the status of a recognized religion (Thailand); 100.9. Consider the establishment of a national human rights institution in compliance with the Paris Principles (India); establish an independent national human rights institution in compliance with the Paris Principles (United Kingdom, Poland, Egypt, Afghanistan, Portugal, Australia, Norway, Spain, Democratic Republic of Congo, Palestine, Ecuador, Djibouti, Russian Federation); in order to further strengthen and institutionalize the government’s policies and strategies (Indonesia); continue considering the establishment of a national human rights commission in compliance with the Paris Principles (Chile); make effective the Paris Principles, notably those relating to the establishment of a national human rights commission (Burkina Faso); explore the possibility of consolidating the work of existing institutions and establishing a national human rights institution in conformity with the Paris Principles (Malaysia); 100.10. Take into consideration the recommendations made by the Belgian Parliamentary Special Commission on “the treatment of sexual abuse and acts of paedophilia within a relation of authority, in particular in the Church” aiming at better ensure the rights of the juvenile victims of sexual offences and in particular to increase the limitation period applicable to crimes of rape of or sexual assaults on minors (France); 100.11. Redouble effort to achieve the appropriate implementation of the Convention of the Rights of the Child, in particular with regard to full exercise of right to education, and the protection of minors from sexual abuse and exploitation and, above all, to put an end to detention of foreign children in closed detention centres, in accordance with the decision of Minister of Migration Policy and Asylum (Ecuador); 100.12. Continue efforts to strengthen its international cooperation to prevent and punish acts involving the sale of children, child prostitution, child pornography and child sex tourism (Moldova); 100.13. Adopt and fully implement as soon as possible the national action plan against domestic violence (Austria); 100.14. Continue its efforts in the area of women’s rights and finalize the national action plan to combat domestic violence (Canada); 100.15. Include homeless women and children, including unaccompanied children of foreign origin as priority beneficiaries into poverty reduction strategy (Kyrgyzstan); 100.16. Fully implement all laws, policies and programmes which have been adopted to strengthen gender equality and the rights of women (Moldova); 100.17. Strengthen relevant measures in order to improve further gender equality (Japan); 100.18. Accelerate efforts aimed at fully implementing the wide range of laws, policies and programmes aimed at strengthening gender equality and women’s rights (Malaysia); 100.19. Continue its efforts relating to human rights education and training, particularly for law enforcement agents (Morocco); 100.20. Increase human rights education and training for police officers (Austria); 100.21. Fully implement in time the provisions contained in the Master Plan regarding penal establishments (Austria); 100.22. Ensure full integration of persons with disabilities into socio-economic and political affairs, particularly equal access to job opportunities, promoting of their right to education, adequate resources for care and support for children with psychosocial disabilities in the family and in the community, and finally, to ensure their accessibility to public transportation and buildings (Thailand); 100.23. Continue and further step up efforts with regard to the promotion of human rights education (Slovenia); 100.24. Continue its close cooperation with civil society in the follow-up to the UPR session (Austria); 100.25. Facilitate the active involvement of civil society stakeholders, including human rights non-governmental organizations, in follow-up to the review (Portugal); 100.26. Clear the backlog in responses to thematic questionnaires of the Human Rights Council Special Procedures (Russian Federation); 100.27. Pursue its efforts relating to human rights education and training in order to make its internal mechanism to combat discrimination effective and more efficient (Burkina Faso); 100.28. Increase its efforts to eradicate any types of stereotypes against women (Uzbekistan); 100.29. Take necessary measures to enable women to exercise their rights without harassment, coercion, and discrimination (Palestine); 100.30. Take all appropriate action, including programmes of education and training, in order to eliminate prejudice and discrimination based on sexual orientation and gender identity (Norway); 100.31. Strengthen its measures to prevent and combat xenophobia and racial prejudice among politicians, public officials and the general public, in line with the recommendation of the CERD (South Africa); 100.32. Increase the effectiveness in preventing any cases of xenophobia or racial discrimination that have been demonstrated by officials and increase its activities to combat these scourges (Uzbekistan); 100.33. Take effective measures to curb racial hatred and religious intolerance, by strengthening its measures to prevent and combat xenophobia and racial prejudice among politicians, public officials and the general public (Bangladesh); 100.34. Take further steps to prevent racially motivated violence through awareness-raising activities and improve the employment situation of immigrants, as well as to combat violence in general and strengthen the prosecution of those who still engage in it (Japan); 100.35. Improve overall conditions in prisons and adopt relevant measures to tackle the problems such as overcrowding (Czech Republic); 100.36. Improve conditions in Belgium’s prisons, including in relation to overcrowding (Australia); 100.37. Remedy prison overcrowding and its repercussion on the right to health (Djibouti); 100.38. Continue promoting political and legislative developments in this regard regarding measures taken to reduce overcrowding in prisons and to implement the master plan, as this is a theme that affects countries in several regions in the world (Chile); 100.39. Allocate more resources from the national budget and take additional measures to improve the situation in prisons and so as to ensure that the deteriorated penitentiary situation is no longer be a problem in the country (Ecuador); 100.40. Adopt efficient measures to reduce prison overcrowding and enhance hosting conditions of penitentiary facilities and shelters (Algeria); 100.41. Enhance its efforts to reduce prison overcrowding (United States); 100.42. Take measures to reduce the amount of time that defendants spend in pre-trial detention (United States); 100.43. Take steps to improve the conditions in the closed centres for aliens (Sweden); 100.44. Finalize the implementation of the “Master Plan for More Humane Prison Facilities” and continue to take action to address the problem of overcrowding in prisons and its consequences in regards to the conditions of the prisoners (Sweden); 100.45. Give priority to measures that reduce the backlog of court cases and that provide for adequate staffing in law courts (Netherlands); 100.46. Adapt procedural law to the requirements established in the Salduz case, guaranteeing to detained persons access to a lawyer from the moment of the first interrogation (Spain); 100.47. Address the situation in its prisons and detention facilities particularly in relation to their exposure to frequent strikes of the prison guard personnel (Slovakia); 100.48. Bring ODA up to the internationally committed 0.7 per cent of GDP to Developing countries and 0.2 per cent to LDCs, specially, to support in the areas of poverty reduction, climate challenges and persons with disabilities (Bangladesh); 100.49. Fully respect the economic and social rights of migrant workers and their families and ensure their safety and security (Bangladesh); 100.50. Promote equal access to education through inclusive policies in the education system aimed at children from poor, foreign and minority families (Mexico); 100.51. Strengthen the asylum procedures by, among others, improving legal assistance for asylum-seekers, expediting the procedures, and responding to specific needs of asylum-seekers who are children, women and the elderly (Thailand); 100.52. Find long-term solutions to avoid situations where asylum-seekers, especially women and children, have to live in degrading conditions (Norway); 100.53. Ensure sufficient safe and secure housing for asylum seekers (United Kingdom); 100.54. Continue to give special attention to the rights of children and women asylum seekers, in particular by providing shelter, and ensuring their protection from violence (Indonesia); 100.55. Improve the living conditions in centres for asylum-seekers and revise existing system of dealing with individual complaints including the need to ensure that legal advice services are available in those centres (Czech Republic); 100.56. Consider making the asylum procedure more transparent including at the appeals stage (Nigeria); 100.57. Implement with strict observation to the principle of non-refoulement, the monitoring mechanism that is being developed to monitor forcible removals (Indonesia); 100.58. Continue to increase its capacities for integration of migrants (Slovakia); 100.59. Find a positive solution to the institutional crisis, that Belgium has been going through for several months, through a dialogue between the various communities of the Belgian society (Djibouti). 101. The following recommendations enjoy the support of Belgium, which considers that they are already implemented or in the process of implementation: 101.1. Ratify the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance (Spain, Brazil, Argentina); become a party to the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance at an early stage (Japan); 101.2. Complete at the earliest the ratification process of the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance and fully recognize the competence of the Committee on Enforced Disappearances, as provided for in articles 31 and 32 of the Convention (France); 101.3. Introduce a provision permitting the dissolution of organizations inciting racial hatred in domestic law (France); 101.4. Not relax its efforts to eradicate practices such as incitement to hatred and violence from certain far-rights groups, wherever they appear, including on the Internet, where they are especially prevalent (Indonesia); 101.5. Take action to eliminate sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography (Bangladesh); 101.6. Provide adequate support to sexually exploited or at-risk children (Islamic Republic of Iran); 101.7. Develop a strategy to eradicate the process of child trafficking, child prostitution, and child pornography in the process of the development of the national plan of actions on combating trafficking in human beings (Belarus); 101.8. Effectively address through legislation and policies the sexual exploitation of children, including child pornography (Egypt); 101.9. Allocate substantial resources and give special attention to children of the most vulnerable groups in the society (Afghanistan); 101.10. Adopt comprehensive legislation concerning domestic violence (Poland); 101.11. In consultation and cooperation with relevant partners, take appropriate measures to implement the National Plan of Action for Children (Hungary); 101.12. Approve and implement as soon as possible the National Action Plan 2010–2014 to combat domestic violence (Spain); 101.13. Seek the opinion of the concerned parties before the approval of the draft national action plan against domestic violence 2010–2014 (Hungary); 101.14. Implement the recommendation of the Human Rights Committee to discontinue public funding of political parties which propagate hate, discrimination and violence (Russian Federation); 101.15. Ensure effective coordination at the federal, regional and community levels for the implementation of the Convention on the Rights of the Child, the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (Poland); 101.16. Tackle the issue, noted by the Human Rights Committee, that complaints against police officers did not always lead to the imposition of commensurate penalties (Turkey); 101.17. Pay particular attention to tackle the pay gap between men and women through reinforced policy measures (Nigeria); 101.18. Protect gender identity and expression under anti-discriminatory laws and policies (Norway); 101.19. Strengthen its measures to prevent and combat xenophobia and racial prejudices amongst politicians, public officials and the general public, as well as to promote tolerance between all ethnic and national groups (Pakistan); 101.20. Monitor the incidence of and combat racism and xenophobia (Brazil); 101.21. Take necessary measures to prevent inquiries, arbitrary detentions, searches and questioning by judicial and police authorities motivated by physical appearance, skin colour and racial or ethnic origins. Additionally, impose severe sanctions on authorities that commit such excesses and ill-treatment (Ecuador); 101.22. Stop detention of minors in adult prisons (Islamic Republic of Iran); 101.23. Take actions to ensure that no ill-treatment occurs during expulsions, inter alia by introducing an effective system for lodging complaints of such treatment (Sweden); 101.24. Ensure that legal advice services are available inside the asylum-seeker and irregular migrant closed detention centres (United Kingdom); 101.25. Eliminate the systematic detention at the border of asylum-seekers and migrants in an irregular situation and limit to exceptional cases the deprivation of liberty of asylum-seekers during the period of the determination of their request for asylum (Mexico); 101.26. Ensure that no arms are traded with regions that deploy child soldiers (Netherlands). 102. The following recommendations will be examined by Belgium which will provide responses in due time, but no later than the eighteenth session of the Human Rights Council in September 2011: 102.1. Withdraw its reservations to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (Czech Republic); 102.2. Withdraw its reservations and interpretative declarations on the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination (Iran); 102.3. Harmonize national legislation with human rights treaties, and in particular withdraw reservations to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (Ecuador); 102.4. Ratify the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages, the leading instrument in this respect (Hungary); 102.5. Elaborate a National Action Plan for the promotion and protection of human rights that allows federal and non-federal institutions that work in this field to better coordinate policies and their implementation (Ecuador); 102.6. Establish a national human rights institution fully compliant with the Paris Principles by elaborating an action plan for the protection and promotion of human rights (Djibouti); 102.7. Accelerate the process of withdrawal of declarations under article 2 of the Convention on the Rights of the Child concerning non-discrimination principle, which limits the enjoyment of the Convention rights by children who do not have Belgian nationality (Kyrgyzstan); 102.8. Renew its action plan against the sexual exploitation of children for commercial purposes (Canada); 102.9. Adopt clear and comprehensive legislation regarding domestic violence, in full compliance with CEDAW recommendations (Brazil); 102.10. Develop a comprehensive and coordinated national strategy to combat all forms of violence against women and girls, as recommended in 2008 by the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women (Kyrgyzstan); 102.11. Ratify, pursuant to the recommendation of the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, the Council of Europe Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities (Russian Federation); 102.12. Further step up efforts to extend the action plan against domestic violence to cover all forms of violence against women (Norway); 102.13. Circulate and implement the Bangkok Rules on the treatment of women prisoners and non-custodial measures for women offenders as part of its reform of the judicial system (Thailand). 103. The recommendations below did not enjoy the support of Belgium: 103.1. Ratify the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of all Migrant Workers and Members of their Families (Argentina; Islamic Republic of Iran; Egypt; Pakistan; Democratic Republic of Congo; Palestine); 103.2. Adhere to international human rights instruments, which it is not yet a party to, notably the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families (Burkina Faso); 103.3. Reconsider its position relating to the ratification of the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families pursuing to recommendation 1737 of 17 March 2006 of the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe, which Belgium is a member of (Algeria); 103.4. Consider acceding to the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families (Nigeria); Accede to the International Convention on the Rights on the Protection of all Migrant Workers and Members of their Families as an additional fundamental step for the protection of human rights (Guatemala, Ecuador); 103.5. Afford sufficient legal safeguards so that complaints by foreigners do not have negative consequences regarding their stay in the country, in order to implement penal provisions relative to acts of xenophobia and racial discrimination and to investigate and effectively sanction human rights violations committed against foreigners or persons belonging to minorities (Mexico); 103.6. Increase the effectiveness of measures taken to prevent manifestations of racial hatred or intolerance, including in the statements of politicians, civil officials or the press and promptly introduce legal ban on the activities of any political parties and organizations that propagate hatred and racial discrimination (Belarus); 103.7. Establish a national mechanism to coordinate and implement policies and programmes to combat child exploitation (Canada); 103.8. Revise its penal code to ensure that its legislation on child pornography covers representation of a child by whatever means for primarily sexual purposes (Pakistan); 103.9. Specify child trafficking as a separate crime in criminal legislation as recommended by the Committee on the Rights of the Child (Belarus); 103.10. Take necessary measures to ensure that corporal punishment is explicitly prohibited by law under all circumstances (Poland); 103.11. Provide human rights education and training about non-discrimination in particular to law enforcement officials and take effective measures to prevent and prohibit racial profiling by the police (Egypt); 103.12. Take specific steps to strengthen the institution of the family, including raising awareness among the youth of traditional understanding of the family and its social values (Belarus); 103.13. Consider lifting the ban on headscarves in schools (Malaysia); 103.14. Implement the recommendation of the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination to declare illegal and prohibit organizations which promote and incite racial discrimination (Russian Federation); 103.15. Recognize that, though national Belgium’s legislation fully complies with requirements to guarantee the absence of racial discrimination, it is not truly effective as complaints of discrimination by non-citizens and persons of foreign origin continue to be numerous, encourage the adoption of necessary measures to combat racial discrimination establishing public polices that would fight outbreaks of intolerance, discrimination and xenophobia. Additionally, fully respect the human rights of foreigners independently of their migration status (Ecuador); 103.16. Undertake a comprehensive set of measures to tackle racial discrimination and combat more resolutely all forms and manifestations of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and religious intolerance against foreigners and religious minorities, such as Muslims (Islamic Republic of Iran); 103.17. Tackle discrimination against the Muslim community and insults against Islamic sanctities and allow all Muslims to practise Islam in accordance with their religious beliefs, without Government interference or approval (Islamic Republic of Iran); 103.18. Establish a specific mechanism to monitor Islamophobia and adopt effective measures to combat this evil phenomenon among political parties and extreme right-wing organizations (Islamic Republic of Iran); 103.19. Take additional steps, including legislative steps, to eradicate discrimination against migrant workers, members of their families as well as representatives of religious and national minorities (Belarus); 103.20. End the excessive use of force by the police in maintaining order during mass demonstrations as well as against foreigners subject to deportation from the country (Belarus); 103.21. Discontinue authorization for the excessive use of force by the law enforcement, especially indiscriminate use of Tasers (Islamic Republic of Iran); 103.22. Terminate the practice of holding persons suffering from mental illness in prisons and prison psychiatric wards (Iran); 103.23. End detention of asylum-seekers at borders and create alternatives to detention for asylum-seeking families (Iran). 104. All conclusions and/or recommendations contained in the present report reflect the position of the submitting State(s) and/or the State under review. They should not be construed as endorsed by the Working Group as a whole. Annex Composition of the delegation The delegation of Belgium was headed by H.E. VANACKERE Steven, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs and composed of the following members: • M. ROUX François, Ambassadeur, Représentant permanent de la Belgique auprès de l’Office des Nations Unies à Genève; • M. BRAUWERS Hugo, Ministre Conseiller, Représentant permanent adjoint de la Belgique auprès de l’Office des Nations Unies à Genève; • M. OUVRY Bart, Porte Parole, SPF Affaires Etrangères; • M. TILEMANS Michel, Directeur Droits de l’homme, SPF Affaires Etrangères; • Mme VANKEIRSBILCK Petra, Directeur communication et relations externes, SPF Affaires Etrangères; • M. VERLAECKT Koen, Secrétaire Général du	 Service Flandre Internationale, Communauté flamande; • Mme WEERTS Laurence, 	Directeur de Cabinet adjointe, Cabinet de la Vice-Première Ministre, Ministre de l’emploi et de l’Egalité des chances, chargée de la Politique de migration et d’asile • M. LAMMENS Bart, Chef de Cabinet Adjoint, Cabinet du Ministre des Affaires Etrangères; • Mme BERRENDORF Marie-Françoise, Conseiller général à l’Appui stratégique, Direction générale des Etablissements pénitentiaires, Service Public Fédéral de la Justice; • M. VANDAMME François, Conseiller général, Travail et Concertation	 sociale-Division des Affaires internationales, Service Public Fédéral Emploi; • Mme 	ADRIAENSSENS Alexandra, Directrice à la Direction de l’Egalité des Chances du Ministère de la Communauté française; • Mme BYNENS Julie, Conseiller, Délégué du Gouvernement flamand auprès des organisations multilatérales à Genève; • M. CLAIRBOIS Marc, Conseiller,	 Délégué de la Communauté française de la Belgique et de la Région wallonne à Genève; • Mme GOOSSENS Kristine, Conseiller, Cellule stratégique du Secrétaire d’Etat au Budget, à la Politique de Migration et d’Asile et à la Politique des Familles; • Mme HEYNDRICKX Isabelle, Conseiller Droits de l’homme, Cabinet du Ministre des Affaires Etrangères; • Mme FASTRE Frédérique, Conseiller, Institut pour	 l’égalité des femmes et des hommes; • Mme ROCHEZ Sandrine, Conseiller Juridique, Police fédérale – Direction de la coopération Policière internationale; • M. ROGISTER Yves, Conseiller auprès du Ministre-Président de la Communauté française et de la Région wallonne; • Mme STAESSENS Nele, Conseiller, Cellule stratégique du Ministre de la justice; • M. TIMMERMANS Jens, Conseiller, Cellule stratégique du Ministre de la justice; • M. VIDAL Maarten, 	Conseiller, Service Flandre Internationale-Division de la Politique, Communauté flamande; • M. WERY Philippe, Conseiller, Direction générale de la Législation et des Libertés et Droits Fondamentaux-Chef du Service des Droits de l’Homme, Service Public Fédéral de la Justice; • M. MINSIER Yannick, Secrétaire d’Ambassade, Représentation permanente de la Belgique auprès de l’Office des Nations Unies à Genève; • M. BAERT Xavier, Secrétaire d’Ambassade, Représentation permanente de la Belgique auprès de l’Office des Nations Unies à Genève; • Mme GRISARD Stéphanie, Attaché, Direction générale 	de la Législation et des Libertés et Droits Fondamentaux-Service des Droits de l’Homme, Service Public Fédéral de la Justice; • Mme JOOSTEN Véronique, Attaché, Droits de l’Homme, SPF Affaires Etrangères; • Mme PROUMEN Valérie, Attaché, Service Lutte contre la pauvreté et économie sociale, SPP Intégration sociale; • Mme VAN LUL Colette, Attaché, Direction générale de l’Office des étrangers, Service Public Fédéral Intérieur. 