  United Nations  A/HRC/21/11    General Assembly   Distr.: General 9 July 2012  Original: English  Human Rights Council Twenty-first session Agenda item 6 Universal Periodic Review   Report of the Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review*  * The annex to the present report is circulated as received.   Brazil Contents  Paragraphs Page   Introduction .............................................................................................................  1–4 3  I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process ................................................  5–118 3   A. Presentation by the State under review ...........................................................  5–16 3   B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review ........................  17–118 4  II. Conclusions and/or recommendations .....................................................................  119–120 14  Annex   Composition of the delegation .........................................................................................................  26 Introduction 1. The Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review (UPR), established in accordance with Human Rights Council resolution 5/1 of 18 June 2007, held its thirteenth session from 21 May to 4 June 2012.  The review of Brazil was held at the 9th meeting on 25 May 2012. The delegation of Brazil was headed by Ms. Maria do Rosario Nunes, Minister, Head of the Human Rights Secretariat. At its 15th meeting held on 30 May 2012, the Working Group adopted the report on Brazil. 2. On 3 May 2012, the Human Rights Council selected the following group of rapporteurs (troika) to facilitate the review of Brazil: China, Ecuador and Poland. 3. In accordance with paragraph 15 of the annex to resolution 5/1 and paragraph 5 of the annex to Human Rights Council resolution 16/21 of 25 March 2011, the following documents were issued for the review of Brazil:  (a) A national report submitted/written presentation made in accordance with paragraph 15 (a) (A/HRC/WG.6/13/BRA/1);  (b) A compilation prepared by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) in accordance with paragraph 15 (b) (A/HRC/WG.6/13/BRA/2);  (c) A summary prepared by OHCHR in accordance with paragraph 15 (c) (A/HRC/WG.6/13/BRA/3 and Corr.1). 4. A list of questions prepared in advance by the Czech Republic, Denmark, Germany, Ireland, the Netherlands, Norway, Slovenia, Sweden and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland was transmitted to Brazil through the troika. These questions are available on the extranet of the UPR.  I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process  A. Presentation by the State under review 5. The national report of Brazil was presented by the Minister of Human Rights, Maria do Rosário Nunes. In her introductory statement, the Minister emphasized that, for Brazil, the universal periodic review is a mechanism to foster cooperation and constructive dialogue on human rights. 6. Ms. Nunes continued by adding that the protection and promotion of human rights are irrevocably enshrined in the Brazilian Constitution and highlighted the Brazilian practice of consultative process, involving civil society participation in policy design, through national conferences, councils and other collective bodies. 7. Ms. Nunes mentioned that the Brazilian development project, which integrates economic growth and social inclusion, and guarantees the indivisibility of human rights. Brazil has accomplished almost all the Millennium Development Goals, and more than 28 million citizens have overcome poverty in recent years. 8. The Minister drew attention to President Rousseff’s plan “Brasil sem Miséria” (“Brazil Without Extreme Poverty”), which aims at eradicating extreme poverty by 2014, thereby rescuing 16 million people from this state. She explained that the Plan builds upon the “Bolsa Família” programme, a conditional cash transfer programme, and also innovates with the “Active Search” strategy, which seeks to identify and integrate the most vulnerable sectors of society into education, health, housing and other policies. 9. Ms. Nunes added that, despite the global financial and economic crisis, Brazil enjoys full employment, and that around 2.4 million formal jobs have been created since 2011. 10. The Minister highlighted other concrete measures, such as the strengthening of the goals of the 2008 National Plan for the Eradication of Slave Labor, through the approval of a Constitutional Amendment. She mentioned that the right to food had also gained constitutional status in 2010, further strengthening policies that ensure the provision of food to vulnerable groups and foster food production and family farming. 11. In addition, she continued, two strategies are under way to ensure adequate housing: the urbanization of slums and the provision of subsidies for the acquisition of homes by low-income populations. The latter, called “My House, My Life”, includes investments of US$ 63 billion and will benefit 2 million families. 12. Turning to the area of respect for diversity and combating stigma, Ms. Nunes pointed out that Brazil has a vast array of measures covering gender equality, lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender (LGBT) people’s rights, elimination of racism, religious freedom, protection of human rights defenders, the rights of indigenous, Quilombola and Roma communities, access to justice, the dignity of persons deprived of liberty, the rights of migrants, and the protection of children, older persons and persons with disabilities. 13. The Minister remarked that, for the first time, Brazil has a woman president, and the number of women in ministerial and other key positions is unprecedented. However, she stated that gender equality remains a challenge, though Brazil is addressing the issue through the Ministry for Women's Policies and, particularly, through the emphasis accorded to the implementation of the Maria da Penha Act, which focuses on violence against women. 14. Furthermore, the Minister stated that the establishment of the Truth Commission will play a key role in the realization of the right to memory and truth and that the Access to Information Act makes secrecy an exception and forbids the confidentiality of documents on human rights violations. 15. It was recalled that the Supreme Federal Court recently issued landmark decisions. It recognized the right of the Pataxó Hã-Hã-Hães to their traditional land and reaffirmed the possibility of establishing quotas for people of African descent in public universities. In addition, the Executive and Legislative branches have cooperated for the approval of the National System for Prevention of Torture and the creation of a national human rights institution. 16. The Minister concluded by emphasizing that the country shows that human rights and development are complementary and mutually reinforcing. Brazil is a country that grows, includes and protects, with full respect for human rights.  B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review 17. During the interactive dialogue, 78 delegations made statements. Recommendations made during the dialogue are to be found in section II of the present report. 18. Mauritania noted the positive balance sheet of Brazil in human rights promotion. It commended the country’s programmes for fighting poverty and efforts to improve its prison system. It welcomed the legislation concerning women’s rights and encouraged the reinforcement of provisions to improve detention conditions for women. 19. Mexico acknowledged the importance Brazil gave to the recommendations made during the first cycle of the UPR, in particular the adoption of a law on freedom of information.  It asked about measures taken to improve the living conditions of persons with disabilities and to socially integrate the elderly.  Mexico made recommendations. 20. Morocco commended the efforts of Brazil to implement its recommendations and pledges from the first cycle and for its strategy of human rights-centred development. It paid tribute to the constructive diplomacy of Brazil at the Human Rights Council. It made recommendations. 21. Mozambique praised legal improvements by Brazil in the areas of women’s and children’s rights, persons with disabilities, rights of minorities and indigenous peoples, inter alia.  It recognized the Government’s efforts to eliminate slave labour and child labour as well as to prevent violence against women.  Mozambique made a recommendation. 22. Namibia highlighted the “Programme to Eradicate Child Labour” as a reflection of the commitment of Brazil to children’s rights. It commended Brazil for the Law on Access to Public Information as a result of a UPR recommendation. It expressed concern over killings and violence. It made recommendations. 23. Nepal welcomed the efforts by Brazil to implement its recommendations from the first cycle. It commended its development programmes aimed at combating poverty and promoting human rights, in particular gender equality and non-discrimination. It made recommendations. 24. The Netherlands commended Brazil for introducing Human Rights Indicators and annual reports. It recognized its commitment to eradicating child and slave labour and to counter domestic violence. It expressed concern for human rights defenders and conditions in prisons. It made recommendations. 25. Nicaragua commended the human rights policy expressed through the implementation of socio-economic programmes to promote human development and eradicate poverty. Nicaragua praised the leadership of Brazil in the promotion of human rights at the international level. Nicaragua made recommendations. 26. Norway commended the efforts of Brazil in poverty reduction, social equality, women’s rights, LGBT rights, the Truth Commission and the Law on Access to Public Information. It expressed concern for the situation of indigenous peoples and human rights defenders and perpetrators’ impunity. It made recommendations. 27. Pakistan appreciated efforts in the realization of the rights to adequate food, health, education and housing, and to combat violence against women.  Pakistan asked Brazil to share the salient aspects of the “Active Search” strategy. Pakistan made recommendations. 28. Palestine noted that Brazil was a party to most international Conventions and issued a standing invitation to special procedures. It appreciated the efforts of Brazil to reduce poverty and ensure social equality, noting that it had integrated its social policies in developmental strategies. It valued Brazilian policies to confront violence against women and measures for people with disabilities. It made recommendations. 29. Paraguay welcomed the various plans adopted on the area of human rights aimed at eliminating historical and structural inequalities.  It praised the adoption of the law on public information, in particular the provision that banned the consideration of documents concerning human rights violations as classified.  Paraguay made recommendations. 30. Peru noted progress made in the reduction of poverty, extreme poverty and social inequality; improved access to education; the promulgation of the law on access to public information and the establishment of a National Truth Commission.  Peru made recommendations. 31. Philippines valued the sustained effort by Brazil to integrate all human rights into its legal and development policies to combat poverty and promote a process of human development through democratic oversight. It made a recommendation. 32. Canada commended the creation of the National Truth Commission to investigate human rights violations committed between 1946 and 1988. The Commission would help prevent the recurrence of these practices within the context of Brazilian public institutions and would play a lead role in starting a process of transitional justice in the country. Canada made recommendations. 33. Portugal hailed the inspiring extraordinary progress that Brazil had made in combating poverty. It asked Brazil to apprise the Council of the results achieved in this regard and encouraged it to establish a Paris principles compliant human rights institution. It made recommendations. 34. Qatar commended Brazil for its commitment to strengthen human rights and to achieve equality and justice. It paid tribute to Brazilian strategies to reduce poverty and the mortality rate among children. Qatar wished success to Brazil in achieving gender equality. Qatar made a recommendation. 35. The Republic of Korea acknowledged the Government’s efforts to implement the recommendations it had received during the first cycle, especially the increases in women’s participation in political affairs as well as the reduction of poverty, infant mortality and malnutrition.  It welcomed the adoption of the 3rd national human rights plan.  It made recommendations. 36. The Russian Federation welcomed the measures taken by Brazil to improve the national human rights mechanisms and the engagement of civil society in those processes.  It recognized the role played by Brazil in combating racial discrimination. It made a recommendation. 37. Saudi Arabia commended efforts to promote human rights, particularly to protect the family and society. It particularly appreciated efforts to help the homeless, early childhood services and programmes for the elderly and persons with disabilities. Saudi Arabia made recommendations. 38. Senegal noted with interest the results made in the improvement of living conditions of the people, the increasing role of women in public life and measures taken to eliminate child labour. Senegal made recommendations. 39. Singapore commended Brazil for the strong emphasis placed on promoting gender equality and protecting women against violence as well as for its progress in addressing child labour issues. It made recommendations. 40. Slovakia welcomed ratification by Brazil of the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination and its Optional Protocol, the Optional Protocols to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance, and the Third Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child). It commended the efforts to reduce poverty, combat malnutrition and child mortality. It made recommendations. 41. Slovenia highlighted the ratification by Brazil of all major international human rights instruments. It was concerned about the level of violence against women, precarious conditions and overcrowding of some prisons, prevalence of sexual abuse of and violence against children. Slovenia made recommendations. 42. South Africa appreciated the role of Brazil in the Council on matters related to racism, racial intolerance and xenophobia.  It asked for information on the policies put in place to promote ethno-racial affirmative action. It made a recommendation. 43. Spain congratulated Brazil on its progress in the field of human rights. It noted that Brazil was party to the main international and regional instruments, had ratified the Statute of the International Criminal Court and had a standing invitation for all the special procedures. It made recommendations. 44. On the subject of human rights defenders, Ms. Nunes pointed out that Brazil promotes a global policy for their protection, which encompasses measures to support the work of defenders, to monitor risk and to provide police protection. As informed by the Minister, the National Programme for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, created in 2004, is implemented by local governments and civil society. It has assisted 464 persons and currently has 299 people under protection, including individuals from indigenous and Quilombola communities. Brazil has two other protection programmes: the Programme for the Protection of Victims and Witnesses and the Programme for the Protection of Threatened Children and Adolescents. In 2011, the budget for these three programmes was increased by 30 per cent. 45. Regarding indigenous peoples, Ms. Nunes stated that the Federal Constitution ensures their exclusive rights to their land. She also said that there are currently 660 indigenous lands in Brazil, which corresponds to 13 per cent of the total national territory, or 1.1 million km2. In the last five years, 49 new lands have been demarcated. Paulo Pankararu, Ombudsman of the National Indigenous Foundation, stated that, in 2010, 800,000 Brazilians declared themselves as indigenous (in 1970, there were around 200,000). Regarding land protection, 196 lawsuits were registered in 2011 to combat invaders and prevent illegal occupation. He informed the Council that Brazil currently has 2,819 schools for indigenous people and there are 83,000 indigenous families that benefit from the “Bolsa Família” Programme. Mr Pankararu also highlighted the creation of the Special Secretariat of Indigenous Health in 2010. 46. In response to questions concerning International Labour Organization (ILO) Convention 169 concerning Indigenous and Tribal Peoples in Independent Countries, the Deputy Secretary of Social Articulation in the President’s Office, Juliana Miranda, recalled the policy of full social participation in Brazil, and that Brazil has initiated regulation of the previous consultation process provided for in the Convention, with the participation of all relevant stakeholders. 47. The delegation recognized the need for improvement in the justice and prison systems. The Director of the National Penitentiary Department, Dr Augusto Rossini, highlighted the National Programme to Support the Prison System, launched in November 2011, with a 650 million dollar budget, in addition to federal State resources. He indicated that this will lead to the creation of 62,000 additional prison places by 2014. The main goals are to ensure that there be no space deficit in women’s prisons and that those incarcerated in police stations be reallocated to appropriate facilities. Mr. Rossini also mentioned the implementation of a National Programme for Health in Prisons, with special attention to women’s health, and the efforts to enhance education in prisons, recalling that there are currently 48,000 prison inmates studying in Brazil. 48. In this context, Mr. Luciano Athayde Chaves, representative of the National Council of Justice, spoke about the Collective Mobilization for Prison Reviews, based on three pillars: improving the effectiveness of criminal justice, guaranteeing due process of law and promoting social re-integration. 49. At the end of this segment, Ms. Nunes stated that torture shall not be tolerated under any circumstances in Brazil and that all efforts have been made to prosecute and punish this practice. She added that national legislation determines that torture cannot be pardoned or amnestied and that Brazil ratified the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and has a draft bill establishing a National Preventive Mechanism, including permission of inspections without prior notice. 50. Sri Lanka noted with satisfaction the adoption of agrarian reform policies, the commitment of Brazil to promote gender equality and the reduction of infant mortality and malnutrition. It made a recommendation. 51. Sweden noted the commitments of Brazil against torture, noting the recent visit by the Subcommittee on Prevention of Torture and its recommendation to create a National Preventive Mechanism. Regarding the detention system, it noted reports of serious ongoing problems. It expressed concern over human trafficking. It made recommendations. 52. Switzerland encouraged Brazil to continue its efforts to improve prison conditions and to pursue the combat against trafficking for sexual exploitation. It was concerned by the difficulties in ensuring respect for the rights of indigenous communities. It made recommendations. 53. Thailand indicated that it stood ready to share its experiences related to improving prison conditions. It also noted the adoption of the Law on Access to Public Information and the establishment of the Truth Commission. Thailand made recommendations. 54. Timor-Leste noted the progressive realization of economic, social and cultural rights in Brazil. It believed that the adoption of measures for the protection of human rights defenders must be coordinated with measures strengthening the independence and transparency of the judiciary. It made a recommendation. 55. Trinidad and Tobago highlighted as noteworthy strides that Brazil had made in giving effect to accepted UPR recommendations. In particular it commended Brazil for the efforts undertaken in relation to combating violence against women; improving the prison system; reducing vulnerability and catering for diversity. 56. Turkey noted with appreciation efforts undertaken to improve the living standards of the Brazilian people; the robust legal and institutional human rights framework and the improvements made in the field of gender equality. It made recommendations. 57. Ukraine commended Brazil for its human rights action taken, particularly to combat violence against women, reduce poverty and eradicate child labour. It asked Brazil to elaborate more on the measures aiming at HIV/AIDS prevention among persons deprived of their liberty. It made recommendations. 58. The United Kingdom asked how Brazil would tackle the issues of allegations of torture, acts of violence from the police and extra-judicial killings. It also urged Brazil to enhance protection of human rights defenders and indigenous population. It made recommendations. 59. The United States of America urged Brazil to pursue its efforts to improve prison conditions and increase efforts to combat torture, human trafficking, summary executions, abuse of power and corruption involving law enforcement and prison personnel. It made recommendations. 60. Uruguay commended Brazil for its economic and social progress and for the creation of the Truth Commission. It encouraged the authorities to pursue their efforts to ensure higher living standards for boys, girls and adolescents. Uruguay made recommendations. 61. Uzbekistan commended Brazil for its participation in the majority of human rights international treaties and for its work on violence against women. It made recommendations. 62. Venezuela noted the efforts by Brazil to eradicate poverty and promote social inclusion and expressed an interest in learning about the action taken to guarantee that justice be independent, prompt, impartial and free of persecution. It expressed its willingness to share its expertise for the establishment of the national human rights institution in conformity with the Paris principles. 63. Viet Nam was pleased to note the rapid economic growth and positive results in poverty reduction, access to public services, child care and gender equality, even though numerous challenges remained. It made recommendations. 64. Algeria praised Brazil for the measures taken with regard to developments in respecting human rights, especially in combating poverty, and welcomed the adoption of the law on racial equality. It made recommendations. 65. Angola welcomed the implementation of recommendations related to reduction of poverty, social equality, child labour, the rights of indigenous peoples, promotion of justice and tackling crime and encouraged Brazil to continuing its efforts to combat rural violence. 66. Argentina welcomed the progress made in the participation of persons with disabilities and urged Brazil to pursue its efforts to establish new measures to eliminate any discrimination against women with disabilities. It made recommendations. 67. Australia commended Brazil for the positive steps taken to address extreme poverty and establish plans for people with disabilities. It also welcomed the creation of the Truth Commission. However, it was concerned by the violence against human rights defenders. Australia made recommendations. 68. Azerbaijan asked for comments on the main obstacles encountered by the secretariats established to consolidate and strengthen human rights mechanisms in discharging their functions. It made recommendations. 69. Belgium asked about measures that had been or would be taken to ensure that the Truth Commission was given a proper mandate, sufficient funding and was independent, in order to guarantee full access to justice by the victims. It made recommendations. 70. Botswana noted with appreciation the development of the presidential plans to address various human rights concerns and commended Brazil for its positive efforts in areas such as overcrowding in prisons, violence and sexual abuses against women, and child labour. 71. Burkina Faso welcomed the commitment of Brazil to human rights education, the promotion of access to justice; the establishment of a National Human Rights Commission; the campaign for birth registration; and the fight against poverty, child labour and violence against women. It made a recommendation. 72. Poland noted that construction of modern infrastructure should not lead to expropriations and destruction of traditional ways of life; and stated that protection of human rights should have priority over the economic drive to exploit natural resources. It made recommendations. 73. Cape Verde commended Brazil on its approach to human rights, as well as efforts towards the establishment of a national human rights institution in accordance with the Paris Principles. It recognized the challenges in the implementation of plans and programmes. Cape Verde made recommendations. 74. Chad noted with satisfaction that Brazil had been fulfilling its international obligations, particularly through its accession to most human rights conventions and its standing invitation to mandate holders and special procedures. It made a recommendation. 75. Chile welcomed the creation of the Truth Committee and promulgation of the law of access to public information, increasing transparency of State management. It commended efforts by Brazil to reduce poverty. Chile made recommendations. 76. China commended the earnest implementation by Brazil of recommendations accepted at the first UPR and commended its notable results in poverty reduction. China enquired as to the measures taken and achievements made in protecting children’s rights. It made recommendations. 77. Colombia commended Brazil for its plan for the rights of people with disabilities, the success of its “Brazil without Poverty” plan and its combat of all forms of discrimination. It welcomed the creation in 2010 of the national LGBT council and its commitment to the Millennium Development Goals. It made recommendations. 78. Congo welcomed measures to reduce poverty, inequality and gender inequality. It commended the involvement of civil society in the implementation of its human rights programme. Congo noted its concern on issues of inequality, discrimination and the situation of indigenous peoples. 79. Costa Rica commended Brazil on the reduction of poverty, the number of women representatives in the cabinet, its “Stork Network” and children’s health programmes, and the 2010 adoption of a racial equality statute. Costa Rica expressed concern over prison conditions. It made recommendations. 80. Cuba commended Brazil on its social policy and achievements in reducing poverty, discrimination, social inequality and hunger. It recognized improvements in the area of health, right to food and rights of indigenous peoples. Cuba made recommendations. 81. The Czech Republic welcomed the establishment of a Truth Commission and hoped that it would facilitate the reconciliation process. It appreciated the policy enabling citizens’ access information on the human rights situation. It encouraged Brazil to implement the programme to protect human rights defenders. It made recommendations. 82. Denmark voiced concerns about the independence of the projected National Preventive Mechanism against torture. It commended efforts to combat unlawful killings but expressed concern about threats against judges. Denmark enquired about measures to address impunity. Denmark made recommendations. 83. Ecuador commended the achievements of Brazil on discrimination, equal opportunities, poverty reduction, and effective inclusion of the disabled. It also highlighted the participation of women in political life. Ecuador made recommendations. 84. Ms. Nunes reiterated that the main goal of Brazil was to take 16 million Brazilians out of extreme poverty by 2014, particularly children and adolescents, through the “Brazil Without Extreme Poverty” Plan, which is closely monitored by President Rousseff. 85. In response to questions on extrajudicial executions, the National Secretary of Public Security, Regina Miki, acknowledged the challenges related to death squads, which are still operating in some federal states. Federal authorities and the Ministry of Justice have been active in combating these groups, and have managed to impose serious setbacks on their illegal activities. Whenever investigations are in place, police or other officers suspected of belonging to death squads are immediately removed from duty and, if proven guilty, are expelled from the force and criminally prosecuted. Ms. Miki gave positive examples of operations: the dismantlement of a single death squad in Pernambuco, resulting in a 20 per cent reduction in the state homicide rate; and the arrest of 30 police officers in Goiás, and 45 in Rio de Janeiro. 86. The Secretary-General of the Presidency of the Supreme Federal Court, Mr. Anthair Valente, recalled the provisions of the Federal Constitution guaranteeing access to justice. The State, he said, is obliged to provide free legal assistance whenever necessary. The Judiciary has decided to simplify the process for criminal cases involving women in vulnerable situations or older persons. 87. Congressman Domingos Dutra, President of the Human Rights Commission of the House of Representatives, presented significant progress in the legislative sphere, mentioning examples such as the law creating the National Truth Commission; the law ensuring Access to Information; and Draft Constitution Amendment 438, on the expropriation of properties where slave labour is practised. He expressed commitment to the approval of the bill creating the National Mechanism for the Prevention of Torture, the bill for the protection of human rights defenders and the bill prohibiting corporal punishment of children and adolescents. 88. The International Advisor of the Ministry for Promotion of Racial Equality, Magali Naves, highlighted successful policies for the promotion of racial equality. The 2010 Census, she noted, recorded an increase in the number of people who identify themselves as black, as well as an improvement in their education and income figures. However, due to the persistence of racial inequality, more efforts are required to foster their social inclusion. In 2010 the Federal Government approved the Racial Equality Statute, which resulted in guidelines and 20 specific programmes to combat racism in several government areas for the four years to come, and the National System for Racial Equality Promotion, aimed at decentralizing policies and taking them to the local level. An intergovernmental forum and a national ombudsman have also been established. 89. Concerning trafficking in persons, the Special Advisor to the Minister of Justice, Marcelo Veiga, presented the National Policy to Combat Human Trafficking, coordinated by the Ministry of Justice in cooperation with civil society. The policy gave rise to the first National Plan to Combat Human Trafficking, which has been in place since 2007. The Plan includes measures to combat sexual exploitation, slave labour and the abuse of women and children. The delegate stated that in the last five years, Brazil had established 15 centers to combat human trafficking in different federal states and to provide victims with free legal, psychological and social assistance. The Government is currently finalizing the Second National Plan of Action against trafficking in persons, which has already been widely discussed with civil society and international organizations, and includes specific action in borders and other key areas. 90. Egypt recognized the accession by Brazil to most international conventions and standing invitation to special procedures. Egypt encouraged Brazil to guarantee the rights of indigenous peoples and to cooperate with international mechanisms vis-à-vis human rights defenders. It made four recommendations. 91. Estonia commended the ratification by Brazil of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and both protocols to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, and the participation of women in political life. Estonia encouraged Brazil to address domestic violence, maternal mortality rates, the freedom of the press and the independence of the judiciary. Estonia made recommendations. 92. Finland welcomed the efforts of Brazil to promote the rights of LGBT persons, and noted that the ruling of the Brazilian Supreme Court concerning the constitutionality of same-sex unions was considered very important.  It noted that continued reports on homophobic crimes and violence indicate that additional measures are needed and asked what legislative measures and steps were being taken to combat these crimes. Finland made recommendations. 93. France welcomed the ratification by Brazil of the main human rights instruments, the standing invitation to special procedures, its fight against poverty, and the establishment of the Truth Commission. It voiced concern about the level of maternal mortality. France made recommendations. 94. Germany welcomed the progress made by Brazil in the protection of human rights activists and its commitment to the “Blue Group” but voiced particular concern about indigenous people not benefiting from the economic progress. Germany made recommendations. 95. Greece expressed satisfaction at the fact that Brazil has made a successful effort to implement most recommendations submitted during the first cycle. While referring to efforts to improve the situation in detention facilities, it asked about other intended measures. It asked the delegation to provide more information on the reduced number of women in Congress. Greece made recommendations. 96. Guatemala commended the methodology in the drafting of its national report. It encouraged Brazil to establish a national human rights council in accordance with the Paris Principles. Guatemala asked Brazil about the normative content of the indigenous people’s statute which had been up for adoption in Parliament since 2009 and the legal definition of rural violence. Guatemala made a recommendation. 97. The Holy See appreciated the efforts by Brazil in areas such as democratic governance, security, economy, child labour and access to education. It acknowledged challenges in poverty, health, education, street children and child workers.  It made recommendations. 98. Honduras commended the progress made by Brazil on equal opportunities and noted the number of women in the cabinet. It expressed the need to examine the observations of the Committee on the Elimination Discrimination against Women vis-à-vis the gender wage gap, and the segregation of indigenous and Afro-descendant women in the workplace; as well as observations of the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights on illiteracy. It made recommendations. 99. Hungary commended Brazil on fulfilling nearly all the Millennium Development Goals, the reduction of poverty and social inequality and the promotion of the autonomy of persons with disabilities. While welcoming efforts to improve prison conditions, it noted that some prisons face overcrowding and do not meet adequate medical care standards.  Hungary noted that the lack of a concerted approach has delayed improvements in combating various forms of sexual exploitation. Hungary made recommendations. 100. India commended Brazil on implementing UPR recommendations from the first cycle, achieving nearly all the millennium development goals, and progress on the alleviation of poverty and inequalities. It encouraged Brazil to continue efforts in inequality and discrimination and the strengthening of legal and judicial frameworks. 101. Indonesia commended Brazil on achieving nearly all the Millennium Development Goals before 2015 and welcomed ongoing measures for the establishment of a national human rights institution in accordance with the Paris Principles. Indonesia noted the many initiatives to combat torture and encouraged continuation in this area. Indonesia made recommendations. 102. Iran acknowledged the efforts by Brazil to improve the standard of living of its people but voiced concern over reports of slave labour and discrimination against women.  Iran made recommendations. 103. Iraq welcomed the accession by Brazil to most international conventions and its open invitation to mandate holders. Iraq paid tribute to the country’s development policy and its various national human rights plans, particularly on the promotion of the rights of persons with disabilities. Iraq made recommendations. 104. Italy welcomed the progress of Brazil in achieving the Millennium Development Goals. It asked about measures to prevent violence in detention centres for juvenile offenders; requested information on the assessment of the 2011 Law on Precautionary Measures; and on the human rights indicators system launched with OHCHR. It made a recommendation. 105. Japan welcomed the efforts made by Brazil with regard to gender equality, particularly the participation of women in policymaking. It voiced concern over continuing issues of prison overcrowding and violence. Japan made recommendations. 106. Lebanon took positive note of the undiminished commitment of Brazil to respect for and protection of human rights. It requested information on the implementation challenges of the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture. Lebanon made one recommendation. 107. Malaysia noted efforts to strengthen the legislative and institutional human rights framework, particularly to improve its national human rights programme. It congratulated Brazil for strengthening its legislative and institutional framework, combating poverty and reducing inequality and discrimination. Malaysia made recommendations. 108. Ms. Nunes highlighted the recognition of same-sex stable unions as family units by the Supreme Federal Court and the National Plan for Promotion of LGBT Citizenship and Human Rights. The Minister, while reaffirming the commitment of Brazil to combating homophobic crimes and violence, acknowledged that the challenges are still significant. 109. The Minister considered positively the establishment of a National Human Rights Institution and mentioned that a congressional bill to adapt the National Council on the Rights of the Human Being to the Paris Principles is under discussion. At the same time, Brazil already has in place various National Councils on specific human rights issues with the participation of civil society. 110. In response to comments on poverty eradication, Ms. Nunes explained the initiative “Brasil Carinhoso” (“Caring Brazil”), established within the “Brazil Without Extreme Poverty” Programme, aimed at providing benefits for children up to six years old. This will reach 2 million Brazilians, extending “Bolsa família”, day-care services, health services and distribution of free medicines to them, among other benefits. 111. In connection with this, the Minister stressed that protecting children and their right to live with their families is a priority. She informed the Council that more than 5 million children and adolescents have been rescued from child labour and that in 2013, Brazil will host the Third Conference on Combating Child Labour and the Worst Forms of Child Labour. She stressed that Brazil will not tolerate sexual exploitation of children and adolescents. 112. Following up on her contribution, Ms. Nunes put forward President Rousseff’s personal commitment with the Plan of Action “Living without Limits”. The Plan draws its inspiration from the Convention on the Rights of People with Disabilities, which has constitutional status in Brazil. As she explained, the budget for the plan is 3.25 billion dollars and it includes actions on health, work and social inclusion. A public presentation of the results is given every six months. 113. Regarding the rights of older persons, Ms. Nunes mentioned the demographic changes in Brazil, to which the country must adapt with health policies, especially for older women, prevention of violence, and social security. She highlighted the National Plan and the National Council on the Rights of Older Persons, the holding of the National Conference in 2011, and the Statute of Older Persons. She also mentioned the social security programmes to ensure minimum income for all older persons in Brazil. Internationally, she added, Brazil is advancing the rights of older persons within the United Nations system and the Organization of American States. 114. Ms. Nunes stated that Brazilian National development policies promote human rights, including those of indigenous and Quilombola populations. She acknowledged that human rights must enjoy special attention in the context of events such as the FIFA World Cup and the Olympic Games, to guarantee that sporting events will be held in full compliance with human rights and for the benefit of all Brazilians. She also said that, in order to guarantee adequate housing, including in the preparation of those events, the Ministry of Cities is developing a national legal framework for urban dislocations, the draft of which is available on the Internet for civil society participation. 115. With regard to indigenous peoples, Ms. Nunes said that the current development projects contribute not only to economic growth, but also to the creation of clean energy, which accounts for a large part of the country’s supply. Moreover, infrastructure creates regional and local benefits. 116. On the Truth Commission, the Minister clarified that it is not a Government entity, but rather a State institution and explained that it will provide answers on enforced disappearances, homicides, kidnappings and other crimes. Its legacy will strengthen democracy, which, together with human rights, has been a permanent beacon for Brazil for the past 28 years. 117. Ms. Nunes’ final remarks presented Brazilian participation in the universal periodic review as a great contribution to human rights in the country – an ongoing exercise which involves the entire Brazilian Government. The Ministry of Human Rights will be attentive to the best ways to follow up on and monitor the implementation of the accepted recommendations. 118. Ms. Nunes concluded that, despite the challenges ahead, Brazil is on the right track for the effective realization of human rights in the lives of all Brazilians.  II. Conclusions and/or recommendations**  ** Conclusions and recommendations have not been edited. 119. The following recommendations will be examined by Brazil, which will respond in due course, but no later than the twenty-first session of the Human Rights Council in September 2012. These responses will be included in the outcome report adopted by the Human Rights Council at its 21st session:  119.1. Continue with the implementation of recommendations related to the ratification of human rights international instruments (Burkina Faso);  119.2. Take more steps towards full implementation of CEDAW recommendations (Egypt);  119.3. Consider withdrawing reservations to the core international human rights instruments, in particular to the Second Optional Protocol to ICCPR (Turkey);  119.4. Fully align the national legislation with all obligations arising out of the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court (ICC) (Slovakia);  119.5. Fully align the national legislation with all obligations under the Rome Statute of the ICC, including incorporating the Statute’s definition of crimes and general principles, as well as adopting provisions enabling cooperation with the ICC (Slovenia);  119.6. Establish mechanisms to monitor and evaluate the compliance with its human rights obligations (Costa Rica);  119.7. Consider becoming a State party and ratify the International Convention for the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and their Families to protect the human rights of these migrant workers (Philippines);  119.8. Consider ratifying the Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families (Chile);  119.9. Signs and ratify as soon as possible the optional protocol to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (Portugal);  119.10. Ratify the ILO conventions No. 189 and 87 regarding, respectively, decent conditions of work for female and male domestic workers and freedom of association and protection of the right to organise (Chad);  119.11. Expedite the implementation of an efficient and autonomous National Preventive Mechanism, as stipulated in the OP-CAT and ensure that it enjoys the independence, resources and other conditions needed to fulfil its task (Sweden);  119.12. Prompt adoption of Bill no. 2442 with amendments that guarantee the independence and autonomy of the National Preventative Mechanism members, in conformity with Brazil’s OPCAT obligations (United Kingdom);  119.13. Swiftly implement the proposed National System to Prevent and Combat Torture to address concerns over abuse in prisons (Australia);  119.14. Adopt Bill No. 2442 in order to guarantee the independence and autonomy of the members of the National Preventive Mechanism, in conformity with Brazil’s obligations under OPCAT (Denmark);  119.15. Request the Sub-committee on the Prevention of Torture to publicly release the report of its September 2011 visit (Switzerland);  119.16. Step up the necessary processes for the creation of the National Council for Human Rights (Mozambique);  119.17. Encourage and facilitate relevant human rights institutions to be accredited by the International Coordinating Committee of NHRIs in line with the Paris Principles in order to create a space for independent monitoring of human rights, particularly on abusive military and police activities (Namibia);  119.18. Conclude the process for the adoption of the draft law that creates a national human rights institution in compliance with the Paris Principles (Peru);  119.19. Give further impetus to the creation of a national human rights institution in accordance with the Paris Principles (Portugal);  119.20. Establish a national human rights institution in accordance with the Paris Principles (Senegal);  119.21. Ensure that the establishment of a national human rights institutions be in conformity with the Paris Principles (France);  119.22. Accelerate efforts toward the establishment of a Brazilian National Human Rights Council in accordance with the Paris Principles, including through passing a Bill on converting the Council for the Defence of the Rights of the Human Person into the National Human Rights Council which is currently in the agenda of the National Congress (Indonesia);  119.23. Expedite effort to establish a national human rights institution in conformity with the Paris Principles (Malaysia);  119.24. Amend its legislation for the legal recognition of same-sex couples (Finland);  119.25. Ensure that federal and state authorities work more efficiently together to produce statistics and regular human rights reports (Belgium);  119.26. Continue to prepare reports in order to enhance and promote the human rights situation (Qatar);  119.27. Continue its efforts to strengthen human rights, particularly within the framework of the family (Saudi Arabia);  119.28. Encourage initiatives fostering social and inter-community harmony (Algeria);  119.29. Share with other countries good practices and achieved developments (Guatemala);  119.30. Share its best practices within poverty reduction and the promotion of social equality at the bilateral and multilateral level (Lebanon);  119.31. Pay particular attention to seek even more effective results in the implementation of policies addressing the following issues: protection of the rights and promotion of the socio-economic situation of indigenous peoples and Afro-descendent Quilombo communities; access to justice and combating impunity; extra-judicial executions, torture in detention and; protection of human rights defenders (Cape Verde);  119.32. Continue in its effort to eliminate extreme poverty and include in its social policies those who are most vulnerable, especially women, children, Afro-descendants, indigenous peoples, the elderly and persons with disabilities (Ecuador);  119.33. Continue advancing in the creation of the National Plan for Infancy and Adolescence (Colombia);  119.34. Continue with the proper implementation of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, particularly with regard to the exercise of their political rights (Mexico);  119.35. Formulate programmes for the effective implementation of the National Plan on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (Nepal);  119.36. Continue its efforts to implement the national plan for the human rights of persons with disabilities and exert further efforts to eliminate discrimination against them and integrate them into society (Palestine);  119.37. Ensure an effective non-discrimination for persons with disabilities as well as recognition of all persons with disabilities as persons before the law (Slovakia);  119.38. Ensure that people with disabilities in situations of abandonment or without family support are able to live in the community in a non-segregated way, providing for their access to services such as health, education or social security (Slovakia);  119.39. Adopt legislation to implement the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (Spain);  119.40. Adopt measures and safeguards to ensure the exercise, in conditions of equality, of the legal capacity and recognition before the law of persons with disabilities (Costa Rica);  119.41. Continue promoting cooperation and dialogue in addressing situations of concern in the Human Rights Council (Pakistan);  119.42. Inform the Council about results achieved and lessons learnt in their mid-term UPR Report on the “Living Without Limits” plan (Hungary);  119.43. Adoption of the principle of equal pay for equal work, regardless of any differences (Iraq);  119.44. Intensify efforts to enhance the participation of women in socio-economic activities (Nepal);  119.45. Continue its efforts to guarantee full equality, opportunities and treatment for women and continue implementing national development plans (Palestine);  119.46. Continue its efforts to consolidate greater representation of women in decision-making positions, both in public administration and the private sector (Peru);  119.47. Continue to promote gender equality in all fields (Qatar);  119.48. Consider the possibility of implementing affirmative action policies in order to achieve a larger representation of women in the executive, legislative and judiciary branches (Ecuador);  119.49. Continue to prioritize policy aimed at promoting equality and repairing social distortions and disparities (South Africa);  119.50. Follow up on the recommendation of ILO to continue efforts to ensure full equality of opportunity and treatment for women, persons of African Descent and indigenous persons (Turkey);  119.51. Continue combating inequalities in access to employment and in working conditions based on gender and race as noted by CESCR (Turkey);  119.52. Adopt effective measures in the structured labour market in order to accelerate the elimination of occupational segregation (Honduras);  119.53. Continue its efforts to eradicate all forms of discrimination against the elderly (Argentina);  119.54. Encourage employment opportunities programmes for the elderly and strengthen measures to prevent and punish discrimination against them (Mexico);  119.55. Address discrimination and prejudice against leprosy in line with the Principles and Guidelines for the Elimination of Discrimination against Persons Affected by Leprosy and Their Family Members and the relevant General Assembly resolution (Japan);  119.56. Take into consideration the provisions of HRC resolution A/HRC/RES/13/27 relating to sport and racism, when preparing and organizing the 2014 football World Cup and the 2016 Olympic Games, in order to promote understanding, tolerance and peace and strengthen the efforts in the struggle against racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance (Morocco);  119.57. Ensure that urban restructuring in advance of the 2014 World Cup and the 2016 Olympics be properly regulated to prevent displacements and forced evictions, and that residents in affected areas are given full and timely information about proposals affecting them; engage in a genuine negotiation with the communities to explore alternatives to eviction; and, where necessary, offer compensation or alternative adequate housing close to the existing communities (Canada);  119.58. Make every effort to ensure that the forthcoming World Cup and Olympics will bring lasting benefits to the poorest and most marginalized urban inhabitants (Ukraine);  119.59. Establish measures for greater accountability to prevent loss of life (Namibia);  119.60. Work towards abolishing the separate system of military police by implementing more effective measures to tie State funding to compliance with measures aimed at reducing the incidence of extrajudicial executions by the police (Denmark);  119.61. Take stronger action, at the federal government level, to counter “death squads” (Republic of Korea);  119.62. That other state governments consider implementing similar programmes to Rio de Janeiro’s UPP Police Pacifying Unit (Australia);  119.63. Implement further measures to combating and preventing torture, as well as strengthen existing mechanisms for the implementation of the recommendations of the United Nations Committee Against Torture and other international bodies (Uzbekistan);  119.64. Continue the authorities’ efforts to prevent and combat torture both at the federal and state levels (Indonesia);  119.65. Revise the human rights training programmes for the security forces, emphasizing the use of force according to the criteria of necessity and proportionality and putting an end to extra-judicial executions (Spain);  119.66. Make sure prisoners and detainees have access at all times to their rights and descriptions of proper treatment, including those laid down in the Standard Minimum Rules and the Body of Principles for the Protection of Detainees and make sure that they have access to effective procedures to realize these rights (Netherlands);  119.67. Make further efforts to improve conditions in detention facilities according to international standards, especially including developing gender-sensitive policies and programmes for women (Republic of Korea);  119.68. Take action to improve prison conditions, in particular to improve the conditions of women’s detention facilities in accordance with international standards, and ensure protection of human rights of all detainees, including guarantees of due process and protection against cruel and inhumane treatment (Slovenia);  119.69. Reform the penitentiary system to reduce the level of overcrowding and to improve the living conditions of persons deprived of their liberty (Spain);  119.70. Address the high rate of homicides in Brazil’s overcrowded prisons (Turkey);
 119.71. Reduce prison overcrowding and pretrial detention periods by enforcing the 2011 Law on Precautionary Measures (United States);  119.72. Take action to improve prison conditions (Czech Republic);  119.73. Exert further efforts to improve prison conditions (Egypt);  119.74. Undertake effective measures to improve prison conditions (Hungary);  119.75. Closely monitor the effectiveness of, and review if necessary, the National Programme to Support the Prison System and the Law on Precautionary Measures (Japan);  119.76. Pay extra attention to the special needs of women prisoners by considering implementing the Bangkok rules (Thailand);  119.77. Make more efforts to improve the situation in detention facilities especially in women’s prisons (Greece);  119.78. Prioritize the reform of the prison system and ensure respect for and protection of the human rights of all detainees (Italy);  119.79. Adopt a policy of taking an explicit and published decision on instituting a federal investigation and prosecution in all cases involving violence against human rights defenders (Netherlands);  119.80. Pass legislation, without undue delay, to confirm the official status of the National Programme for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders, and give priority to its wide implementation (Norway);  119.81. Ensure that the National Programme for the Protection of Human Rights Defenders be implemented in all states of the nation (Spain);  119.82. Ensure the protection of human rights defenders, notably the leaders of indigenous communities fighting for their rights (Switzerland);  119.83. Consider the development of a comprehensive policy to address the problem of human rights violations against its defenders founded on strategies for strengthening the independence of the judiciary and increasing the awareness of the population and public authorities as to the important role of these defenders (Timor-Leste);  119.84. Ensure adequate safeguards are in place to ensure protection of human rights defenders, including those working within indigenous communities (United Kingdom);  119.85. Increase funding to provide human rights advocates with adequate protection (Australia);  119.86. Adopt a law to confirm the official status of the national programme for the protection of human rights defenders (Belgium);  119.87. Respect the rights of Human Rights Defenders and protect them in their everyday struggle (Poland);  119.88. Intensify efforts for the security of human rights defenders and reinforce cooperation with all stakeholders, in particular, the states and military police (Czech Republic);  119.89. Take all necessary measures to ensure the physical integrity of journalists and human rights defenders (France);  119.90. Provide systematic training to judges, prosecutors and lawyers on women’s rights and violence against women, including on the implementation of the Maria da Penha Law on domestic and family violence against women (Canada);  119.91. Increase its efforts to fully implement the Maria da Penha Law regarding the rights of women victims of domestic violence (Portugal);  119.92. Continue fighting violence against women (Senegal);  119.93. Continue its efforts to implement policies to enhance the protection of women against violence (Singapore);  119.94. Take effective steps to ensure gender equality and counteract violence against women (Uzbekistan);  119.95. Take further steps in order to promote gender equality and eliminate domestic and family violence in the country (Azerbaijan);  119.96. Take legal and practical measures to eliminate violence and discrimination against women particularly in the rural and remote areas of Brazil (Iran);  119.97. Take measures to address homo- and trans-phobic crime, including by establishing a system for recording such crimes (Finland);  119.98. Strengthen domestic cooperation between relevant actors, as well as international cooperation, in order to combat both internal and international trafficking and sexual exploitation of women and children (Sweden);  119.99. Adopt and implement, in accordance with relevant international law, national legislation to combat trafficking in women and children which will prosecute and convict traffickers, and take effective measures to prevent sexual tourism (Switzerland);  119.100. Step up prosecutions of individuals who traffic in persons and increase funding for specialized services, including shelters, for trafficking victims (United States);  119.101. Combat human trafficking, “death squads”, violence and related sexual exploitation (Holy See);  119.102. Adopt more comprehensive legislation to combat trafficking in persons (Iraq);  119.103. Focus on developing a system allowing effective collaboration between the health, social security, education, and tourism sectors with the aim of adequately tackling all forms of sexual exploitation in the country (Hungary);  119.104. Continue with its efforts to eradicate child labour with a particular focus on children in highly vulnerable situations (Singapore);  119.105. Intensify the programmes to combat child labour (Algeria);  119.106. Take effective legislative measures for special protection and integration mechanisms for victims of slave labour (Iran);  119.107. Give greater importance to the recommendations made by the Committee of the ILO Experts as regards the combat of slavery labour (Iraq);  119.108. Strengthen measures concerning the many children who continue to live on the street where they remain vulnerable to abuse (Turkey);  119.109. Improve the protection of children by fighting against child labour, providing for children living in the streets and ensuring education for them (Holy See);  119.110. Accelerate the improvement of the judicial, police and prison systems in line with international human rights standards (Holy See);  119.111. Continue the implementation of the policy aimed at improving the judicial system, reforming the law enforcement bodies and reducing the crime rate and corruption (Russian Federation);  119.112. Facilitate access to justice through additional measures, which could reduce structural obstacles such as the cost and the cumbersome nature of the procedures (Morocco);  119.113. Strengthen the judiciary by combating slowness as well as addressing corruption and the repressive treatment of adolescents (Spain);  119.114. Continue its endeavours to contribute to improving the criminal justice system in the country (Azerbaijan);  119.115. Continue to promote reforms to the Judicial System which incorporate the prioritization of the respect for human rights (Chile);  119.116. Further develop the legislation that would allow women to exercise their rights to privacy and confidentiality during police investigations and guarantee the right to presumption of innocence, due process, and legal defence (Estonia);  119.117. Increase the total number of Public Defenders and to secure a constant presence of Public Defenders in all detention institutions (Netherlands);  119.118. Ensure the availability of public defenders in all detention locations in order to enhance guarantees of due process (Canada);  119.119. Secure what is prescribed in Article 149 of the Brazilian Penal Code, relating to the criminal prosecution of the crime of slavery (Paraguay);  119.120. Ensure that all killings by law enforcement personnel are properly registered and thoroughly, independently investigated (Slovakia);  119.121. Combat impunity on crimes against judges by creating a protection system for judges under threat (United States);  119.122. Ensure that all members of the police and prison officers that commit human rights violations and abuses, such as torture and ill-treatment, are held accountable (Czech Republic);  119.123. Effectively fight against arbitrary and on-duty police killings, in particular by creating a strong framework for impartial investigation (Germany);  119.124. Continue working for the strengthening of the process of truth-seeking (Paraguay);
 119.125. Continue its efforts to guarantee the right to the truth for victims and families of serious human rights violations and for all Brazilian society, ensuring proper functioning of the Truth Commission (Argentina);  119.126. Ensure that the Truth Commission created in November 2011 be provided with sufficient resources to recognize the right of victims to justice, in particular for crimes with no statute of limitation (France);  119.127. Protect the natural family and marriage, formed by a husband and a wife, as a basic cell of society as it provides the best conditions for raising children (Holy See);  119.128. Study the possibility of having campaigns for registering girls, boys and adolescents in the North and North-east of Brazil, with the cooperation of the universal system of human rights (Uruguay);  119.129. Regularly foster awareness on birth registration at national and local levels, particularly through the organization of public campaigns to highlight the importance of birth-registration (Uruguay);  119.130. Consider freedom of expression concerns when drafting cybercrime legislation (Estonia);  119.131. Examine the possibility of expanding the scope of application and the target population of the “Bolsa Familia” programme aimed at reducing poverty and redouble its efforts to reduce social inequalities (Morocco);  119.132. Continue efforts to reduce poverty and increase, if possible, the necessary resources for current programmes, such as the “Bolsa Familia” (Greece);  119.133. Continue strengthening social security to cover all segments of society (Nepal);  119.134. Continue implementing and strengthening social inclusiveness, equality and non-discriminatory public practices, among which “Brazil without Poverty” (Nicaragua);  119.135. Continue its efforts to combat poverty and social disparities (Pakistan);  119.136. Pursue strategies fighting against poverty and social inequalities (Senegal);  119.137. Continued action in eradicating extreme poverty (Sri Lanka);  119.138. Continue to address the grievance of and empower vulnerable groups – particularly women, children, indigenous people, and people of African descent – by reducing urban-rural discrepancies and promoting equal access to opportunities for all, especially access to health care, education, employment, housing and social security (Thailand);  119.139. Strengthen measures in poverty eradication as well as in reducing socio-economic development gaps among regions and social groups (Viet Nam);  119.140. Continue its favourable policies with concrete initiatives aimed at the most vulnerable groups such as women, children and minorities (Viet Nam);  119.141. Improve the struggle against poverty, improve the fate of individuals and communities fighting for access to land in rural zones, and protect them against evictions, intimidations, threats and killings (Belgium);  119.142. Concentrate on the poorest and most vulnerable (Burkina Faso);  119.143. Continue to move forward its poverty reduction strategy and protect the rights of vulnerable groups so as to achieve sustainable economic and social development (China);  119.144. Ensure equal access to poverty reduction programmes, particularly for indigenous families (Egypt);  119.145. Continue programmes and measures aimed at eliminating poverty and increasing the socio-economic development of the country (Cuba);  119.146. Continue advancing in the development and implementation of the “Stork Network” and the national system for registration, monitoring and accompanying for pregnant women in order to prevent maternal mortality, in the context of the policy for integral assistance to woman’s health (Colombia);  119.147. Reduce infant mortality rates and malnutrition in children (Chile);  119.148. Continue its efforts to guarantee free and quality health services (Cuba);  119.149. Continue the process of expanding the possibilities of accessing the voluntary termination of pregnancy in order to ensure the full recognition of sexual and reproductive rights (France);  119.150. Maintain the commitment to poverty reduction (Holy See);  119.151. Reduce maternal, child and infant morbidity and mortality by promoting effective assistance measures during pregnancy and at the moment of birth (Holy See);  119.152. Improve health-care efforts, especially to reduce child mortality and the prevalence rate of HIV and AIDS (Iran);  119.153. Continue its effort in strengthening the protection of the right to food (Iran);  119.154. Take more effective measures to address the problem of social and economic inequality, in particular in the areas of health, education and employment opportunities between the population in the urban and rural areas (Malaysia);  119.155. Keep taking the necessary measures to combat continued deforestation in order to ensure the effective enjoyment of economic, social and cultural rights (Egypt);  119.156. Continue with its religious education programmes in public schools (Namibia);  119.157. Implement strategies to solve problems facing education, particularly at the elementary level (Palestine);  119.158. Take adequate measures to combat illiteracy and guarantee to all citizens the enjoyment of the right to education, especially for poor people, those living in rural areas or indigenous minorities (Holy See);  119.159. Adopt additional measures for access to education, in order to contribute to overcoming the educational gap between the black and white populations (Honduras);  119.160. Continue its educational strategies to ensure that all children enrol in school and receive a quality basic education (Iran);  119.161. Complete the national guidelines for education in the field of human rights and pursue a participatory approach in cooperation with civil society (Iraq);  119.162. Strengthen the awareness campaigns on the rights of indigenous populations and persons of African descent, notably through the implementation of the provisions of the specific laws adopted in this domain (Morocco);  119.163. Further entrench in standard administrative procedures the right of indigenous peoples to be consulted, in accordance with ILO Convention 169 (Netherlands);  119.164. Ensure the rights of indigenous peoples, in particular the rights to traditional lands, territories and resources, and their right to be consulted (Norway);  119.165. Conclude pending demarcation processes, in particular related to the Guaraní Kaiowá (Norway);  119.166. Continue promoting internal debates towards a better regulation of the consultation processes with indigenous peoples on issues that affect them directly (Peru);  119.167. Ensure that indigenous peoples are able to defend their constitutional right to ancestral lands without discrimination and their prior, informed consent is sought in cases of projects that may affect their rights (Slovakia);  119.168. Pay more attention, at all administrative levels, to the rights of indigenous peoples, especially to ensure their land rights (Poland);  119.169. Ensure indigenous peoples adequate consultation as well as full participation in all legislative or administrative measures affecting them (Germany);  119.170. Continue improving the life conditions of migrants and refugees in Brazil (Holy See). 120. All conclusions and/or recommendations contained in the present report reflect the position of the submitting State(s) and/or the State under review. They should not be construed as endorsed by the Working Group as a whole. Annex [English only]   Composition of the delegation  The delegation of Brazil was headed by the Ms. Maria do Rosario Nunes, Minister of State, Human Rights Secretariat and composed of the following members: • Maria Nazareth Farani Azevêdo, Ambassador, Permanent Representative, Permanent Mission of Brazil; • Domingos Dutra, Congressman; President of the Human rights and Minorities Commission House of Representatives; • Luiz Couto, Congressman; Member of the Human rights and Minorities Commission House of Representatives; • Virginia Toniatti, Ambassador; International Advisor Ministry of Justice; • Regina Miki, Secretary of Public Security, Ministry of Justice; • Augusto Rossini, Director of the National Penitentiary Department, Ministry of Justice; • Marcelo Veiga, Special Advisor, Ministry of Justice; • Juliana Miranda National Secretary of Social Articulation, General Secretariat of the Presidency of the Republic; • Anthair Valente, Secretary-general of the Presidency Supreme Federal Court; • Luciano Athayde Chaves, Assistant Judge to the Presidency, National Council of Justice; • Carlos Eduardo da Cunha Oliveira, Chief of the Human Rights Division, Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs; • Michelle Morais, Head of Department of international Cooperation, Human Rights Secretariat; • Rodrigo Dindo, Director of the Department of Social Communication, Human Rights Secretariat; • Victoria Balthar de Souza Santos, International Advisor, Human Rights Secretariat; • Ana Laura Becker de Aguiar, Consultant, Human Rights Secretariat; • Tatiana Leite Lopes, Consultant, Human Rights Secretariat; • Bárbara Pincowska Cardoso Campos, Chief of Staff of the Executive Secretary, Ministry of Social Development (MDS); • Magali Naves, International Advisor, Secretariat for the Promotion of Racial Equality; • Paulo Pankararu (Paulo Celso de Oliveira), National Ombudsman National Indian Foundation (FUNAI); • André Duarte Pereira de Albuquerque, International Advisor, National Indian Foundation (FUNAI); • Luiz Carvalho, Special Advisor, Environment Ministry; • Maria Ceicilene Aragão Martins Rego, Advisor Ministry of Mines and Energy; • Bruno Arruda, Public Defender Federal Public Defender’s Office; • Boni Soares, Director of International Department, Attorney General’s Office; • Quésia Mendes Neiva, Director of Public Service Department, Attorney General’s Office; • Patrícia de Morais Patrício, Federal Attorney, Attorney General’s Office; • João Marcos Paes Leme Counselor, Advisor to the Minister, Ministry of Foreign Relations; • Misiara Cristina Oliveira Advisor, Ministry of Education; • João Genésio de Almeida, Minister-Counselor, Permanent Mission of Brazil; • Elio Cardoso, Counselor, Permanent Mission of Brazil; • Ciro Leal M. da Cunha, First-Secretary, Permanent Mission of Brazil; • Otávio Cançado Trindade; First-Secretary, Permanent Mission of Brazil; • Melina Espeschit Maia, Second-Secretary, Permanent Mission of Brazil; • Bruna Vieira de Paula, Second-Secretary, Permanent Mission of Brazil; • Lucas Paoli Itaborahy, Human Rights Expert, Permanent Mission of Brazil; • Mariana Xavier, Human Rights Expert, Permanent Mission of Brazil; • Paulo de Tarso Lugon Arantes, Legal Advisor, Permanent Mission of Brazil; • Marina Neves, Public Affairs Advisor, Permanent Mission of Brazil; • Thomas Howard Norton, Interpreter; • Monica Lange, Interpreter; • Quesia Maria Mendes Neiva, Federal Attorney, Attorney General’s Office.     