Distr.: General 4 January 2011 Original: English General Assembly Human Rights Council Sixteenth session Agenda item 6 Universal Periodic Review Report of the Working Group on the UniversalPeriodic Review* Croatia * Previously issued as document A/HRC/WG.6/9/L.11. The annex to the present report is circulated as received. Contents Paragraphs Page Introduction............................................................................................................. 1–4 3 
I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process................................................ 5–95 3 
A. Presentation by the State under review........................................................... 6–21 3 
B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review........................ 22–95 5 
II. Conclusions and/or recommendations..................................................................... 96–99 14  Annex Composition of the delegation ......................................................................................................... 23 Introduction 1. The Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review, established in accordance with Human Rights Council resolution 5/1, held its ninth session from 1 to 12 November 2010.  The review of Croatia was held at the 11th meeting, on 8 November 2010. The delegation of Croatia was headed by the State Secretary for European Integration, Andrej Plenkovi.. At its 15th meeting, held on 10 November 2010, the Working Group adopted the report on Croatia. 2. On 21 June 2010, the Human Rights Council selected the following group of rapporteurs (troika) to facilitate the review of Croatia: Burkina Faso, Pakistan and the United States of America. 3. In accordance with paragraph 15 of the annex to resolution 5/1, the following documents were issued for the review of Croatia: (a) A national report submitted/written presentation made in accordance with paragraph 15 (a) (A/HRC/WG.6/9/HRV/1 and A/HRC/WG.6/9/HRV/1/Corr.1); (b) A compilation prepared by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) in accordance with paragraph 15 (b) (A/HRC/WG.6/9/HRV/2); (c) A summary prepared by OHCHR in accordance with paragraph 15 (c) (A/HRC/WG.6/9/HRV/3). 4. A list of questions prepared in advance by the Czech Republic, Denmark, Germany, the Netherlands, Slovenia, Sweden, Switzerland and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland was transmitted to Croatia through the troika. Those questions are available on the extranet of the universal periodic review. I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process 5. During the interactive dialogue, 46 delegations made statements. Recommendations made during the dialogue are found in section II of the present report. A number of delegations welcomed the participative approach taken to the drafting of the national report and the commitment shown by Croatia to the universal periodic review mechanism. A. Presentation by the State under review 6. Mr. Andrej Plenkovi., State Secretary for European Integration, stated that Croatia, which attached great importance to the universal periodic review, had developed an advanced human rights protection system over the past two decades based on the international human rights standards. Croatia had involved both governmental institutions and civil society in the preparatory process of the review, and the national report had been submitted to the Parliamentary Committee for Human Rights and the Rights of National Minorities. 7. The Croatian Constitution enshrined more than 50 articles on human rights. Croatia was party to most international and European human rights instruments and was considering adhering to others. It had also extended an open standing invitation to special procedures in 2003. Under the Constitution, ratified treaties were part of domestic law, had precedence over national legislation and could be directly invoked before a court. 8. Croatia paid attention to promoting tolerance and combating all forms of discrimination. It had formulated and continued to implement three-year national programmes for the protection and promotion of human rights and had developed an institutional framework, with a major role played by the Ombudsman and other specialized ombudspersons. Much attention was focused on implementing that legal framework with the assistance of civil society. 9. In response to advance questions, the head of the delegation stated that Croatia was addressing the consequences of the war as a way to build confidence and promote reconciliation in the region. Closing the impunity gap was another crucial component, and Croatia remained deeply devoted to full cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and strongly believed that it had fulfilled all requests received from the Tribunal’s Office of the Prosecutor. Concerning the one request that the Tribunal considered to have been only partially fulfilled, Croatia had made extensive investigative efforts, and the Trial Chamber concurred with Croatia that it was impossible to verify with certainty the existence of the documents concerned. 10. Croatia then turned its attention to domestic war crimes trials, which were being conducted in a transparent manner, with an increase in the number of proceedings over the past two years. Through its Action Plan, Croatia was ensuring that the proceedings were carried out impartially and professionally, regardless of the ethnic affiliation of the accused. A study conducted by the Ministry of Justice on the judgements rendered in the presence of the accused between 2005 and 2009 had shown that they had been unbiased and impartial. Concerning the convictions delivered in absentia, new provisions had been introduced in the Criminal Procedure Act, and the competent authorities had reviewed those cases. 11. With regard to refugee issues, the number of registered refugees and internally displaced persons had now declined to less than 1,000 from more than 1 million in the 1990s. As agreed by countries in the region at the 2005 Sarajevo Conference, return and local integration were the two equally legitimate alternatives offered to refugees in order to reach a durable solution. Croatia provided statistics on local integration and described a number of measures to encourage returns, notably through a major investment in the reconstruction of housing units. Private property had been almost entirely returned to its owners. As of October 2010, close to 8,000 housing requests by the ex-tenancy rights holders had been met with positive responses. Finally, adequate funds had been allocated for the implementation of a housing care programme provided for in the Revised Action Plan. Croatia also took part in the regional process aimed at the definitive resolution of the refugee issue, as had been the case at the 2010 Belgrade Conference. 12. Croatia guaranteed minority rights to all its national minorities, in accordance with international standards, its Constitution and the Constitutional Law on the Rights of National Minorities. In June 2010, the Preamble of the Constitution had been amended to explicitly recognize 22 national minorities, including the Roma, instead of 10. Seats were guaranteed to national minorities in Parliament, and Croatia was committed to increasing minority participation. 13. The Roma were a recognized national minority and participated in the decision-.making process at all levels. Croatia had adopted a National Programme for Roma and participated in the Decade of Roma Inclusion 2005–2015. 14. The principle of equality was enshrined in the Constitution and enjoyed special legal protection, and the Criminal Code recognized the concept of hate crimes. The 2008 Anti.discrimination Act and the National Plan for Combating Discrimination (2008-2013) were other instruments to counter discrimination. In 2010, Croatia had established a new Working Group to monitor hate crimes at the national level. Special efforts were devoted to combating discrimination against minorities, including the Serb and the Roma minorities and lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender persons. Special attention was being paid both to awareness-raising activities and the strengthening of institutional capacity. Politicians were increasingly spreading the message of tolerance and reconciliation. 15. Recent trends had indicated an increase in the investigation of hate crimes. Criminal acts directed against journalists, particularly attacks on their physical integrity, were treated with the utmost seriousness and tended to be characterized as grave crimes under the Criminal Code. A number of assaults against journalists had resulted in criminal charges, as recently demonstrated through the first-instance judgement in respect of the killings of media professionals Pukani. and Franji.. 16. Gender equality and the empowerment of women were among fundamental principles of the Croatian constitutional order, as demonstrated by a comprehensive institutional and legislative framework, including in particular the Gender Equality Act, public campaigns and other awareness-raising measures. 17. Children’s rights, notably those of the most vulnerable, had always been among Croatia’s priorities. Croatia was party to almost all children’s rights instruments and would soon ratify the Hague Convention on Protection of Children and Cooperation of Inter-Country Adoption. Croatia prohibited corporal punishment of children by law and had been playing a leading role within regional forums in that respect. With regard to alternative care, all orphaned children under the age of 7 must be placed with foster families. 18. Croatia was among the first countries to ratify the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and would adopt a Master Plan of Deinstitutionalization and Transformation of Social Welfare Institutions (2011-2018) by the end of 2010.  19. Resolution of corruption cases had been accorded high priority, as demonstrated by a significant number of high-level corruption cases that were being processed. As a result, there was a trend towards an increasing number of convictions and investigations. 20. Independence, impartiality, professionalism and efficiency of the judiciary had recently been further strengthened in legislation. Croatia had encountered a court backlog and excessive delay in conducting the procedures. Measures undertaken in that regard had resulted in a significant reduction in the number of unresolved cases between 2004 and 2010. The possibility of lodging a constitutional complaint in respect of the length of proceedings had been introduced, as well as the possibility of the next highest court or the Supreme Court protecting the right to have a trial before a specific court within a reasonable period of time. The most recent amendments to the Courts Act had further streamlined this procedure. 21. While Croatia acknowledged its own set of challenges, it remained committed to advancing human rights promotion and protection. The universal periodic review would serve to further improve the human rights situation. Croatia, in approaching the completion of its European Union accession negotiation process, was currently negotiating the chapter on judiciary and fundamental rights; it was the first country to do so. This entailed the adoption of the most sophisticated standards and constituted a concrete track record of their faithful implementation. So too would be the case with the universal periodic review. B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review 22. Algeria commended Croatia for its efforts to strengthen the protection and promotion of human rights through its National Triennial Programme. Algeria welcomed the adoption of the Anti-Discrimination National Plan for 2008-2013. Algeria inquired whether Croatia intended to revise the Constitution, and requested information about the measures taken regarding the high rate of child mortality as a result of traffic accidents. Algeria made recommendations. 23. Morocco noted the challenges faced in improving the implementation of the normative and institutional framework and strengthening administrative and financial capacities. Morocco also noted the elaboration of a protection mechanism against discrimination.  Morocco further underlined the constructive role played by Croatia in the Balkan region. It made recommendations.  24. Cuba praised the special measures and legislation adopted to expand and strengthen gender equality and promotion and protection of the rights of the child. Cuba highlighted the achievements accomplished in social development areas such as poverty, life expectancy, child and maternal mortality, and access to drinking water. Cuba inquired about supplementary measures or programmes to create better conditions for minorities. Cuba made recommendations. 25. Poland expressed appreciation for the progress made regarding the participation of members of ethnic minorities in public life, while expressing concern about their low representation in local and regional governments. Poland inquired about steps to be taken to facilitate returnees’ repossession of their property, access to reconstruction assistance and reintegration into Croatian society. Poland made recommendations. 26. Indonesia praised the progress made in improving the rights of persons with disabilities, noting that Croatia was among the first countries to ratify the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. Indonesia expressed concern about the high incidence of domestic violence, while praising Government initiatives such as public awareness-raising campaigns and training programmes for Government officials. Indonesia also noted the formulation of the Third National Plan against Trafficking in Persons. Indonesia praised the great strides made in combating racism and other forms of discrimination. Indonesia made recommendations. 27. The Russian Federation noted Croatia’s progress in acceding to international human rights treaties and the existence of a national human rights institution that was in conformity with the Paris Principles. It noted the challenges faced in overcoming the consequences of the war in terms of ensuring non-discrimination on ethnic grounds, asking how Croatia was managing to implement the programme aimed at ensuring housing for returning refugees. 28. Azerbaijan referred to the national institutional framework set up to promote and protect human rights, including a national human rights institution accredited with “A” status. It noted positively the accomplishments made in implementing the National Programme for the Protection and Promotion of Human Rights. It noted the great progress made towards achieving the Millennium Development Goals. Azerbaijan made recommendations. 29. Canada welcomed Croatia’s efforts to update the country’s legal and institutional frameworks for the protection of human rights, including through adoption of the National Program for the Protection and Promotion of Human Rights 2008-2011 and the Gender Equality Act in 2008. Canada noted reports regarding the alleged abuse of certain patients in mental health facilities and concerns involving the legal framework that could lead to the unjustified institutionalization of certain persons. While welcoming Croatia’s support for the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, Canada noted continuing concerns over the fact that key documents had not yet been located and made available to the Tribunal. Further, while appreciating ongoing Government efforts to prosecute war crimes cases, Canada noted concerns over discrepancies between accused of Serb and Croat origin. Canada welcomed Government efforts to resolve problems associated with Croatian Serb returnees. Canada made recommendations. 30. France noted that Croatia had yet to ratify the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance. Noting the country’s efforts to adapt its judicial procedures in order to combat impunity for war criminals, France indicated that efforts must still be undertaken to reduce the backlog of cases. France noted Croatia’s ambitious legislation on the rights of women, children and disabled persons, the appointment of three ombudsmen and the adoption of multi-year national strategies. France made recommendations. 31. Belgium regretted the lack of visibility of and follow-up to the work of the Ombudsperson. Belgium inquired about the measures taken to publicize the work of the Ombudsperson and follow up on its observations and recommendations. Belgium expressed concern regarding the difficulties faced by some marginalized persons in terms of access to justice and free legal aid, asking whether the authorities had already assessed the current legislation or intended to do so. Belgium made recommendations. 32. Brazil noted the progress made on the Millennium Development Goals, including with regard to extreme poverty, health care and education. Brazil requested further information about the functioning and results of the system of free legal aid. Brazil noted the need for further progress by Croatia in certain areas, including gender equality and empowerment of women; non-discrimination and the social integration of ethnic minorities, particularly Serbs and Roma; and the resettlement of refugees. Brazil made recommendations. 33. Egypt highlighted the fact that Croatia’s Ombudsperson had been accredited with “A” status and praised the country’s efforts to promote gender. Egypt noted that Croatia was on track to achieve several Millennium Development Goals and requested further information about the progress made in promoting and protecting economic, social and cultural rights.  Egypt acknowledged Croatia’s openness in identifying challenges, such as war crimes and the rights of national minorities. Egypt referred to Croatia’s co-operation for the implementation of the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the Involvement of Children in Armed Conflict. Egypt made recommendations. 34. Turkey was pleased at the achievements accomplished in improving the enjoyment of the right to education, welcoming the fact that elementary school education had been made obligatory and free of charge. Turkey expressed appreciation for the legal prohibition of the corporal punishment of children. Turkey encouraged the Government to further develop private media in order to maintain plurality and freedom of expression. Turkey made recommendations. 35. The Netherlands praised the adoption of the Free Legal Act, while noting reports that equal access to administrative and judicial bodies was not ensured under the Act. It also praised the enshrinement of the right to access to information in the Constitution, which strengthened the possibility of citizens’ enjoyment of that right. It urged Croatia to hold accountable those involved in human rights violations in the 1990s in order to prevent impunity, and encouraged Croatia to cooperate fully with the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia in order to establish full accountability for past events. It made recommendations. 36. Pakistan congratulated Croatia on being on track to achieve Millennium Development Goals. Pakistan requested further information about how the principle of restriction of freedoms and rights of citizens was determined and how the monitoring of hate crimes could be instrumental in enacting new legislation. Pakistan made recommendations. 37. The Republic of Korea noted with concern that minorities still faced discrimination in many instances, including in repossessing their property upon their return, and their limited ability to acquire citizenship. It stated that strengthened protection should be provided to children and minorities during legal proceedings. It inquired about the specific measures taken or to be taken to address this issue. It made recommendations. 38. Austria noted the legislation being brought in accordance with European Union laws and standards, as Croatia was close to finalizing the process of becoming a State member of the Union. Austria praised the steps taken to facilitate the return of a large number of displaced persons, including members of the Serb minority. However, it noted concerns regarding poor conditions of detention as well as an inefficient judiciary, which had led to long delays in the dispensation of justice and in the full integration into society of persons belonging to minority groups. Austria made recommendations. 39. The United States of America stated that Croatia should amplify the efforts to protect the rights of vulnerable minorities. It noted that ethnic Serbs still faced de facto discrimination in several areas, including the administration of justice, employment and housing, and that Roma also faced many obstacles. It noted that Croatia remained a destination, source and transit country for trafficking in persons. It made recommendations. 40. Slovenia appreciated the progress made in Croatia’s integration into the European Union. Slovenia referred to the Supreme Court’s recognition of the right to the restitution of property nationalized after the Second World War and the lack of equal treatment for Slovenian minorities and other persons who were not Croatian citizens in the process. Slovenia also highlighted the fact that the Slovenian minority still did not enjoy all the rights guaranteed under the Constitution, the Law on the Rights of National Minorities and other laws. Slovenia made recommendations. 41. Finland expressed appreciation for the measures taken to eliminate discrimination against the Roma communities. Finland asked how the authorities would improve the situation of Roma who lacked citizenship. Finland also inquired about concrete measures being taken to support the education of Roma children. Finland made recommendations. 42. Norway praised the efforts to enhance equality and non-discrimination concerning Roma minorities. However, it noted persistent problems in the effective implementation of rights provided by law, particularly regarding equitable representation of minorities in the public sector. Norway expressed concern about reports of societal prejudice against minority groups (Serbs, Bosniaks and Roma) and inequalities between women and men in the labour market.  Norway made recommendations. 43. The United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland welcomed the importance Croatia placed on judicial reform, cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, domestic war crimes trials, settling remaining refugee return issues and protection of minority groups. It encouraged further judicial reform. It encouraged Croatia to seek missing documents for the Gotovina trial, to pursue a thorough and comprehensive investigation and act on suggestions from the Chief Prosecutor. It encouraged Croatia to ensure domestic war crimes trials were investigated and prosecuted without discrimination. It made recommendations. 44. The Croatian delegation stated that Croatia was considering the issue of migrant workers as a part of the wider European human rights framework. Croatia had not yet taken a decision on the ratification of the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families, but already had a broad legislative framework for their protection. 45. With respect to hate crimes, Croatia added to the information presented in its introductory statement, noting that special police units had been established to conduct criminal investigations in that regard, with specifically trained personnel. No organized violence against particular groups had been reported, as incidents had been isolated, as evidenced by available statistics, and had been adequately prosecuted and sanctioned. 46. Regarding human rights education, a systematic approach had been introduced in 1999 by Government Decree, and the Ministry of Education was obliged to implement it. Various areas of human rights were taught at various levels of education. The education of teachers was under the mandate of the Agency for Education, and seminars on various human rights issues were organized. Various international human rights days were celebrated. 47. In respect of persons with disabilities, Croatia referred to the National Strategy for Equal Opportunity for Disabled People. A special working group had been established to assess the implementation of the existing legislation and had put forward suggestions for its improvement, such as an amendment relating to guardianship following the deprivation of legal capacity. Such an amendment would require further consideration because of its complexity. 48. The delegation addressed the issue of child victims of traffic accidents. Although the number of accidents remained high, it had decreased slightly in recent years. A working group had been set up to prepare a National Plan for the Protection of Children from Injuries, and focus would be placed on the cooperation of local communities and civil society in improving awareness. 49. Regarding cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, the delegation recalled that Croatia had established a Special Interdepartmental Task Force to determine the fate of requested documents and deliver documents requested by the Office of the Prosecutor. 50. Croatia recalled the information about domestic war crimes and ethnic bias that it had presented in its introductory statement. Concerning unprosecuted war crimes, the Chief State Attorney had issued instructions, and there had been an increase in the number of proceedings over the past two years. The major problem remained impunity for war crimes committed by perpetrators who were currently outside the country. The State Attorney’s Office and the Ministry of the Interior had assembled a priority list for further prosecutions to speed up the process. 51. The resolution of corruption cases had been given high priority by Croatia, and there had been a trend in recent years towards an increasing number of convictions. To prevent corruption, there had been several important legislative changes, including the amendment to the Access to Information Act, in addition to specific training for civil servants. At the regional level, a special extradition agreement had been signed with Serbia, and another was under discussion with Montenegro. 52. The delegation recalled the measures adopted by Croatia on reconstruction and repossession of property, as well as on former tenancy rights holders. Regarding the latter, Croatia had introduced a mechanism that provided every former holder with an opportunity to have a home in Croatia if they wished to return. The delegation provided statistics in that regard. 53. Croatia had a long-standing tradition of providing free legal aid, which had been enhanced by the adoption of the 2008 Free Legal Aid Act. Free legal aid was provided on a wide range of issues, without any discrimination.  54. Under the Constitution, the Slovenian minority, like all other minorities, enjoyed all their rights, including the double voting right, and Croatia supported various Slovenian cultural events held in the country. 55. Croatia was committed to finding appropriate solutions for foreign citizens regarding restitution of or compensation for nationalized property, if this was not possible through existing legislation. 56. With respect to human trafficking, Croatia was not only a transit country, but also had become a country of origin and destination. Therefore, a new national plan had been adopted and had largely been implemented, and other legal measures had been adopted. 57. Croatia stated that it was amending its Penal Code before proceeding to the ratification of the Convention on enforced disappearance. 58. Concerning Roma education, the Croatia Education Policy prohibited any kind of segregation, and Croatia was committed to the integrative education of Roma minorities. 59. Hungary expressed appreciation for the adoption of the strategy for judicial system reform in 2005, while noting challenges such as the number of delays in court proceedings, the unresolved war crimes cases, and providing access to legal aid. Hungary also welcomed the progress made in facilitating the return and reintegration of refugees, especially returnees belonging to the Serb minority. Hungary made recommendations. 60. Sweden referred to the fact that in 2007, the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment had indicated that, in certain cases, alleged ill treatment by the police could be considered as amounting to torture.  Sweden requested elaboration on measures to ensure impartial investigations into allegations of torture and the prosecution and punishment of perpetrators. Sweden asked about measures to protect the rights of children with disabilities. Sweden made recommendations. 61. Italy highlighted its intense and constructive bilateral relations with Croatia. Italy referred to the positive role played by the Italian minority in Croatia as having been instrumental in the steady improvements of political, economic and social standards in the Country. Italy appreciated also the in the establishment of regional cooperation frameworks such as the Central European initiative, the Adriatic-Ionic initiative and the Quadrilateral Initiative. Italy encouraged Croatia to pay attention to both the promotion of women in the labour market and the protection of children from abuse, international drug trafficking and exploitation. Italy made a recommendation. 62. The Republic of Moldova inquired about Government action plans specific to human rights, and asked whether there were indicators/mechanisms to help monitor the implementation of the National Human Rights Promotion and Protection Programme. It also asked whether the protection granted to victims of domestic violence under the national Strategy for Protection from Domestic violence would be extended to potential victims of such violence. It made recommendations. 63. The Czech Republic welcomed Croatia’s readiness to tackle problematic issues, while expressing concern about reports that many cases of war crimes remained unresolved and that the selection of cases had been disproportionately directed at ethnic Serbs. It hoped that Croatia would adopt and implement national legislation and regulations aimed at resolving the issue of former tenancy rights holders, mainly ethnic Serbs, who had been displaced as a result of the conflict. It made recommendations. 64. Belarus inquired about Croatia’s systematic efforts to combat trafficking, including a national plan. Belarus stressed that particular attention should be given to the rights of Roma and the right of refugees to return. Belarus encouraged the protection of women’s rights in the workplace, referring to the need to eliminate unemployment among them. Belarus made recommendations. 65. Palestine welcomed the efforts made regarding refugees and noted Croatia’s cooperation on the issue at the regional level, highlighting the fact that Croatia had elaborated the framework for guaranteeing the right of refugees to return without conditions. Palestine also noted the adoption of a law on regional development in 2009 in order to reintegrate refugees into Croatian society, including re-housing programmes. In addition, Palestine welcomed Government efforts to determine the fate of persons who had disappeared during the war. Palestine made recommendations. 66. Bosnia and Herzegovina praised the significant progress made on various aspects of human rights, particularly the adoption of the 2008 Anti-Discrimination Act. It noted that Croatia was not a party to the 1969 Convention on the Reduction of Statelessness, asking whether the country intended to accede to it. It also praised Croatia’s efforts regarding refugees, encouraging further activities to find durable solutions for them. It made recommendations. 67. While noting that the human rights situation had greatly improved, Serbia raised concern about the security incidents directed against ethnic Serbs, returnees and tourists. Serbia noted the lack of proportional representation of Serbs in local government and the lack of use of the Serbian language, despite the provisions of the Constitutional Law on the Rights of Minorities. Serbia made recommendations. 68. Slovakia praised the adoption of several legislative acts and other measures aimed at reducing the court case backlog and delays in court proceedings, particularly the 2008 Free Legal Aid Act. While praising Croatia’s commitment to resolving outstanding issues related to the sustainable return of refugees and internally displaced persons, Slovakia noted that the restitution of private houses owned by the exiled and displaced -- most of whom were members of the Serb minority -- the restoration of their tenancy rights and their reintegration into society had been addressed to a large extent, but not entirely. Slovakia made recommendations. 69. China noted the human rights office and the commission for monitoring the implementation of the national programme on Roma. China also noted the remarkable progress made in combating racial discrimination, promoting gender equality and combating violence against women and children. China hoped that Croatia would elaborate on the latest progress in implementing the action plan for the Decade of Roma Inclusion 2005–2015. 70. Spain acknowledged the important efforts made in the field of human rights in accordance with the negotiations on accession to the European Union. Spain referred to Croatia’s accession to the majority of the international human rights instruments. Spain referred to the remaining inequality between men and women, particularly in the employment field, and the difficulties in protecting national minorities, especially at the local level. Spain also referred to the Serb and Roma minorities. Spain made recommendations. 71. Mexico recognized efforts to protect the rights of persons with disabilities and encouraged Croatia to strengthen actions to protect persons with mental disabilities in accordance with the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. Mexico expressed appreciation for the information about the programme on the institutionalization of such persons. Mexico made recommendations. 72. Chile noted that Croatia had ratified most human rights treaties and adopted various laws on discrimination, national minorities and gender equality. Chile welcomed Croatia’s national policy for the promotion of gender equality 2006-2010 and the action plan for the protection, rehabilitation and social reintegration of child victims of the war. Chile made recommendations. 73. Nepal referred to the normative and institutional framework for the promotion and protection of human rights. It noted with encouragement that Croatia was on track to achieve the Millennium Development Goals related to extreme poverty and hunger, universal primary education, child mortality and maternal health. Nepal appreciated the efforts and measures taken to create a web of infrastructure for the promotion and protection of human rights. Nepal made recommendations. 74. Argentina welcomed the information about the measures implemented to put an end to practices that might hamper the attainment of the objective of improving the situation of minorities, as well as the information about measures in the area of gender. Argentina made recommendations. 75. Germany highlighted the fact that Croatia had come a long way since the time of the wars and immense suffering related to the break-up of Yugoslavia. In particular, it praised the policy on displaced persons. Regarding combating discrimination, Germany asked whether the number of publications containing negative stereotyping and acts of aggression against members of ethnic minority groups had diminished. Germany also asked about measures taken to strengthen the judicial system. Germany made recommendations. 76. Switzerland raised the issues of discrimination against the Serb and Roma minorities, the lack of a national prevention mechanism despite the ratification of the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture, the ongoing threats and attacks against journalists, and the excessive length of the judicial procedure before the courts. Switzerland made recommendations. 77. Ghana praised the progress made in achieving the Millennium Development Goals, in making respect for human rights the highest value of the constitutional order, and in establishing several bodies to protect the rights of persons with disabilities. Ghana noted the adoption of a National Action Plan for the Suppression of Trafficking in Human Beings and a Constitutional Act on National Minorities and the National Anti-Discrimination Plan. However, Ghana noted concerns about the high unemployment rate among women, the wage differentials between women and men, the predominance of women in low-wage sectors, and the underrepresentation of women in legislative and executive bodies. Ghana made recommendations. 78. Ukraine acknowledged efforts to combat racial discrimination, domestic violence and trafficking in persons and to promote gender equality, child protection and the rights of persons with disabilities, migrants and asylum-seekers. Ukraine welcomed the establishment of the Office for Human Rights and the adoption of the Anti-Discrimination Act (2008). Ukraine asked about measures to ensure the promotion of awareness about non.discrimination and how those who had received asylum could learn the Croatian language. 79. The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia praised the ratification of numerous international human rights treaties and their incorporation into the national legal system. It asked about activities undertaken to strengthen cooperation with civil society organizations for the return of refugees and displaced persons. It also asked about the rights of national minorities and the integration of the Roma minority into the educational system. It made recommendations. 80. Ecuador noted Government efforts to promote human rights through its plans and policies. Ecuador made recommendations. 81. Bangladesh noted that Croatia was on track to achieve the Millennium Development Goals, while expressing concern about the discriminatory practices against national minorities, particularly the Roma people. Bangladesh also expressed concern at the fact that the whole spectrum of trafficking in persons, particularly in women and girls for sexual exploitation, had shown a phenomenal increase. Bangladesh also expressed concern that children had easy access to materials harmful to their psychology and upbringing. Bangladesh made recommendations. 82. Iraq welcomed the establishment of an Ombudsperson in addition to the courts. Iraq also praised the supremacy of the treaties over national legislation. Iraq praised Croatia’s cooperation with the special procedures and the ratification of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. Iraq made recommendations. 83. The delegation of Croatia stated that the country had set up an inter-agency working group to study the possibility of ratifying the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights. On the designation of a national preventive mechanism relating to the Convention against Torture, a bill was currently being considered by Parliament. 84. With regard to statelessness, Croatia was considering the ratification of the 1961 Convention, as its existing legislation offered broader protection for certain categories. 85. Croatia continued to implement its judicial reform strategy, in particular to enhance the independence and efficiency of the judiciary. Comprehensive legislative and organizational reforms had been adopted and, in June 2010, the Constitution had been amended. A new State Judicial Council Act had been adopted to better ensure independence, as well as new provisions relating to the selection of judges. 86. Regarding prison conditions, Croatia was facing a lack of space, but had tried to overcome that problem by opening a new prison by the end of 2010, in addition to two other projects by the Ministry of Justice, to enlarge one prison and build another. In addition, activities for inmates had been proposed in accordance with United Nations standards, and medical care was provided to them. Furthermore, a probation law had been adopted in 2009 to increase the use of alternative forms of punishment. 87. The prohibition of torture was enshrined in the Constitution. The Criminal Code, the Criminal Procedure Act, the Act on the Enforcement of Prison Terms, the Asylum Act and the Aliens Act also contained provisions on torture. 88. The participation of minorities in representative bodies was deemed to be adequate, and there had been increased recruitment of minority members in some civil service sectors. The representation of minorities in administration and the judiciary was sub.optimal. Awareness-raising campaigns had been carried out throughout the country to address that issue. 89. Croatia intended to improve the status of women in the labour market to ensure gender equality. The general legislative framework had been harmonized with international standards, and all forms of gender discrimination in the labour market were prohibited. Equal salary for equal work was also guaranteed by law. The share of women entrepreneurs was on the increase, and this was supported through the Women’s Entrepreneurship Development Strategy. 90. There had been a number of activities to increase the participation of women in the political decision-making process, and the delegation provided statistics in that regard. 91. Croatia considered awareness-raising activities as a key preventive measure against domestic violence. Reports on the implementation of the National Strategy for Protection from Domestic Violence had been made public, and the process of drafting the new Strategy was ongoing. A specific law on domestic violence had been adopted in 2009. 92. The delegation recalled its opening statement relating to the protection of journalists and stated that it cooperated with special procedures on freedom of expression and human rights defenders in that respect. 93. The Convalidation Act set out rules relating to pensions for refugees who had worked in Croatia prior to the declaration of independence, and the delegation provided statistics on its implementation. 94. The status of Roma citizenship was regulated in a simple manner for those who had been born or had lived for a given period of time in Croatia. However, problems arose when their status was not regulated in their country of birth, as they possessed no civil-status-related documents, and improved cooperation among the countries in the region would be the solution to this problem. 95. The delegation welcomed the expressions of appreciation and the recommendations made during the interactive dialogue, as well as the support for Croatia’s European Union aspiration. It reaffirmed its support for the work of the Human Rights Council, notably the universal periodic review. II. Conclusions and/or recommendations 96. The recommendations formulated during the interactive dialogue listed below have been examined by Croatia and enjoyed its support: 96.1. Provide the Government office for Gender Equality as well as the ombudsperson for gender equality with the necessary authority as well as human and financial resources to carry out their work effectively (France); give high priority to the Office for Gender Equality by providing it with necessary resources to effectively carry out its mandate (Ecuador); 96.2. Implement a more human-rights- and community-based approach to the issue of institutionalization of mentally ill persons (Indonesia); 96.3. Reflect and take measures on how to make media more responsible in addressing trafficking issues, in order to make an additional input to tackling this scourge (Republic of Moldova); 96.4. Undertake measures to improve the quality, capacity and effectiveness of the justice system to prevent the abuses of the rights of national minorities and to investigate, prosecute and sanction cases and offenders, particularly against returnees (Serbia); 96.5. Consider the possibility of strengthening targeted social assistance to low-income families with children (Belarus); 96.6. Give special attention to educating Roma girls, many of whom are often unable to finish school because of their gender (Finland); 96.7. Continue consultations with civil society in the follow-up to this universal periodic review (Austria); 96.8. Adopt a transparent and inclusive process with civil society in the implementation of universal periodic review recommendations (Norway). 97. The following recommendations enjoy the support of Croatia, which considers that they have already been implemented or are in the process of implementation: 97.1. Ratify the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance (Argentina; France; The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia) and recognize the competence of the Committee on Enforced Disappearances, as provided for in articles 31 and 32 of the Convention, as early as possible (France); 97.2. Ratify the Hague Convention on Protection of Children and Cooperation in respect of Inter-country Adoption (Ecuador); 97.3. Continue to consolidate its national human rights infrastructure (Egypt); 97.4. Take measures to strengthen the national human rights institutional framework, in particular by allocating the necessary financial and human resources to ensure effective implementation of the mandates of various human rights mechanisms already established  (Algeria); 97.5. Strengthen the independent status of ombudspersons and provide the necessary resources for their effective functioning (Hungary); 97.6. Reinforce the capacity of the Ombudsperson and specialized ombudspersons and their coordination, give appropriate follow-up to their recommendations, and publicize their work among the general public (Belgium); 97.7. Continue its efforts to apply its national programme to the promotion and protection of human rights and the plan of action (Palestine); 97.8. Accomplish progressively human rights voluntary goals as set up by Human Rights Council resolution 9/12 (Brazil); 97.9. Take supplementary measures aimed at the integration of human rights education and training into school curricula, and at training Government officials, as coordinated action along these lines could facilitate better implementation of the existing legal and institutional framework (Morocco); 97.10. Consider organizing additional human rights training for media employees, judges, prosecutors and police officers (Bosnia and Herzegovina); 97.11. Take all necessary measures to protect and promote the rights of persons, notably children with disabilities (Sweden); 97.12. Continue its efforts in protecting the rights of women and children (Egypt); 97.13. Guarantee the exercise of the economic, social and cultural rights of children (Ecuador); 97.14. Continue partnership with civil society organizations in putting in place a legal and institutional system of support for their development (Nepal); 97.15. Enhance the fight against corruption (Germany); 97.16. Translate, publish and make available to the citizens of the country the assessments and recommendations made by international human rights bodies, including the Human Rights Council’s universal periodic review (Norway); 97.17. Continue taking measures to prevent discrimination, intimidation and reprisals in accordance with international human rights standards, through more efficient implementation of relevant legislation (Hungary); 97.18. Strengthen efforts to eliminate discrimination against women, including in the labour market (Ecuador); adopt measures to promote gender equality and non- discrimination, particularly in the area of employment (Iraq); 97.19. Take measures to increase the participation of women in public and political programmes for the empowerment of women, and reinforce measures to ensure equality between women and men in all spheres, including through more effective implementation of relevant legislation (Ghana); 97.20. Step up its initiatives which are specifically targeted towards implementing the National Anti-Discrimination Plan, in particular to promote awareness on non-discrimination, intercommunity harmony, mutual respect and tolerance (Algeria); continue the efforts to implement the National Anti-Discrimination Plan 2008-2013 (Indonesia); 97.21. Take further measures to combat discrimination against minorities, and ensure that they are genuinely put into practice in the field (Switzerland); 97.22. Continue the main measures adopted to eliminate discrimination against the Roma  minority, as contained in the Action Plan for the Decade of Roma Inclusion 2005-2015 (Spain); 97.23. Promote greater tolerance and understanding among the majority population about the rights of the Roma community and migrants (Bangladesh); 97.24. Continue its positive efforts with a view to promoting equality and non.discrimination against different national minorities living together in the country (Cuba); 97.25. Strengthen efforts to combat racial discrimination, especially against the Roma and Serb minorities, in particular in the areas of education, employment, housing, citizenship and political participation (Ecuador); 97.26. Implement fully the obligations to ensure unhampered enjoyment of human rights by all persons with disabilities (Czech Republic); 97.27. Continue to combat racist and xenophobic attitudes (Germany); 97.28. Carry out as soon as possible the implementation of its legislation on torture and the designation of its national preventive mechanism (Switzerland); 97.29. Ensure impartial, full and prompt investigations into all allegations of torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment, as well as appropriate prosecution and punishment of the perpetrators (Sweden); 97.30. Move forward in establishing a system of monitoring and systematic repression of hate crimes, noting that this question is one of the Government’s priorities (Morocco); 97.31. Prosecute and convict perpetrators of domestic violence (France); 97.32. Ensure prosecution and punishment for acts of violence against women (Ecuador); 97.33. Strengthen effective legal and administrative measures to address all forms of violence against children and, in particular, discrimination against children belonging to minorities, especially Roma and foreign children (Bangladesh); 97.34. Implement an effective law to protect the women and child victims of domestic violence (Indonesia); 97.35. Step up the education and awareness-raising campaigns so as to prevent ill treatment of boys and girls, in accordance with recommendations of the Committee on the Rights of the Child (Chile); 97.36. Further improve prison conditions, with a special focus on tackling overcrowding (Azerbaijan); continue legislative and practical efforts to improve living conditions in prison and detention facilities, in particular with regard to reducing overcrowding and ensuring access to health care and education (Austria); 97.37. Continue to effectively implement the Third National Plan against Trafficking in Persons (Indonesia); 97.38. Further strengthen the measures to fight human trafficking (Azerbaijan; Nepal); 97.39. Strengthen the effective implementation of measures undertaken to combat trafficking, and protect victims of trafficking (Bangladesh); 97.40. Continue its efforts in the suppression of trafficking in human beings, in particular in women and girls (Pakistan); 97.41. Step up its efforts to detect, prevent and combat trafficking in minors for the purpose of sexual or other forms of exploitation, in accordance with recommendations of the Committee on the Rights of the Child (Chile); 97.42. Strengthen its efforts to combat trafficking in women and children for sexual and other exploitative purposes (Ghana); 97.43. Increase efforts to combat trafficking in persons, inter alia, through the development of international cooperation with interested Governments, international organizations and non-governmental organizations (Belarus); 97.44. Intensify efforts to proactively identify trafficking victims among vulnerable populations, particularly women in prostitution and migrant men in the agricultural sector (United States); 97.45. Strengthen partnerships with non-governmental organizations to enlist their help in identifying victims of trafficking during authorities’ initial contact with potential victims among women detained for prostitution offences (United States); 97.46. Ensure the responsible repatriation of foreign victims of trafficking (United States); 97.47. Reinforce safeguards for judicial independence and for the objectivity and impartiality of prosecutors (Hungary); 97.48. Continue the implementation of measures to improve the capacity and effectiveness of its judicial system (Slovakia); 97.49. Allow for more transparency with regard to the selection of judges (Germany); 97.50. Intensify efforts to improve efficiency of the judiciary; by implementing legal and organizational measures to prevent undue court delays and reduce the backlog before the courts; improving physical infrastructure and computerization of courts; and the continuation of the rationalization of municipal and misdemeanour courts (United Kingdom); 97.51. Continue, with all necessary determination, the efforts already undertaken to remedy the excessive length of court procedures and difficulties faced in prosecuting war crimes (Switzerland); 97.52. Continue providing free legal aid to the most vulnerable citizens (Pakistan; Palestine); 97.53. Carry out an independent assessment on the effectiveness of the law on free legal aid and, depending on the results thereof, take the measures required to guarantee that the most disadvantaged among the population have access to effective, comprehensive and non-discriminatory legal aid (Belgium); 97.54. Ensure full cooperation of the Croatian Government in making available all requested documents to the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (Canada); 97.55. Establish full collaboration with the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (Italy); 97.56. Pursue a thorough and comprehensive investigation into the missing documents requested for the trial of General Gotovina, and act on any suggestions the Chief Prosecutor has made to improve the investigation, pursuing all avenues of enquiry (United Kingdom); 97.57. Uphold the rule of law, and make every effort to ensure that domestic war crime trials are carried out fairly and without discrimination (Canada); 97.58. Strengthen its efforts to ensure that all war crimes trials are carried out in a non-discriminatory manner and that all cases of war crimes are effectively investigated and prosecuted, irrespective of the ethnicity of the victims and perpetrators involved (Czech Republic); investigate and prosecute all war crimes, regardless of the ethnic origins of the victims and the perpetrators of the crimes (Ecuador); 97.59. Strengthen policies on the rights of the child, with attention to the Guidelines for the Alternative Care of Children, according to Human Rights Council resolution 11/7 and General Assembly resolution 64/142 (Brazil); 97.60. Further enhance measures to guarantee freedom of the press, by investigating acts of intimidation and aggression against journalists in accordance with recommendations of the Human Rights Committee (Chile); 97.61. Take necessary measures in order to ensure effective protection of journalists and to prevent and punish threats and acts of violence of which they are victims (France); take concrete measures to ensure that justice is served in cases of threats and intimidation against journalists and that freedom of the press is guaranteed (Switzerland); 97.62. Adopt legislative measures necessary to strengthen access to public information (Mexico); 97.63. Implement a system of fines to be applied when public authorities do not respond adequately to requests for information (Netherlands); 97.64. Continue its efforts to increase women’s representation in public and political life (Azerbaijan); 97.65. Further adopt policies and measures for the advancement of women and against their discrimination, with a view to a reduction in female unemployment and the elimination of wage differentials (Brazil); 97.66. Pursue its ongoing positive efforts to promote and protect the rights of children in the area of access to health and education, as well as to ensure the empowerment of women (Cuba); 97.67. Ensure equal access to quality education for Roma children (Finland); 97.68. Reach out to the parents of Roma children to make sure that they fully understand the importance of education and, in this effort, use school assistants with a Roma background (Finland); 97.69. Tailor and design tuition in special schools on the basis of the child’s individual needs rather than ethnicity (Finland); 97.70. Further promote inter-ethnic harmony and tolerance, particularly with regard to the Serb and Roma minorities (Brazil); 97.71. Implement measures to promote inter-ethnic harmony and tolerance among the public at large, and continue the efforts to smoothen the reintegration of ethnic Serbs into Croatian society (Norway); 97.72. Intensify efforts to promote inter-ethnic harmony and tolerance among the population (Belarus); make further efforts towards the promotion of tolerance among all citizens, regardless of their origin or ethnic background (Bosnia and Herzegovina); 97.73. Work with and through media to promote tolerance among all citizens of Croatia, and take measures to address the stereotyping of some groups of citizens based on their origin (Bosnia and Herzegovina); 97.74. Provide for persons belonging to the Slovenian minority all guaranteed rights (Slovenia); 97.75. Continue to pay special attention to the situation of the Roma minority by strengthening its efforts to provide equal access to citizenship without discrimination based on ethnicity (Finland); 97.76. Strengthen effective and transparent measures to prevent and punish all forms of discrimination against minorities.  Along the same lines, strengthen the measures to ensure better representation of national minorities in legislative and executive governmental bodies (Mexico); 97.77. Address the remaining shortcomings in the implementation of the Constitutional Law on the Rights of National Minorities, and undertake measures aimed at ensuring effective participation of national minority members in public life and decision-making processes (Ghana); 97.78. Ensure the effective participation of national minorities in public life, in decision-making processes and in executive and judicial institutions at all levels of governance (Serbia); continue efforts for the appropriate representation of national minorities in public and judicial authorities (Nepal); take measures aimed at fair and adequate representation of all minority groups in all public bodies, including the judiciary and human rights coordination bodies at the country level (Poland); 97.79. Apply measures to increase the participation of individuals from the Serb or Roma communities in local and regional governments, and ensure that the provisions of the Constitutional Act on the Rights of National Minorities are fully applied at the regional level (Spain); 97.80. Take additional steps to clear up the backlog of cases in the justice system, ensure the effective implementation of the Constitutional Law on the Rights of National Minorities, and take additional measures to ensure the effective integration of minorities into society (Austria); 97.81. Adopt and implement fair and transparent measures for the sustainable return of members of the Serb minority (Poland); 97.82. Adopt domestic legislation on refugees in conformity with international standards in this field (Argentina); 97.83. Strengthen cooperation on the issue of refugees on the regional level, and focus on the most vulnerable groups or persons in the collective centres in order to find a just solution for them and close those centres (Bosnia and Herzegovina); 97.84. Continue ongoing efforts to ensure the return of refugees and Croatian displaced persons of Serb origin, to their home and the recovery of all of their rights; particularly with regard to their property, pension and social rights (Spain); 97.85. Continue its efforts in facilitating the return and reintegration of refugees and internally displaced Serbs and in further resolving all related issues1 (Slovakia); 97.86. Make efforts to resolve difficulties in repossessing property and acquiring citizenship for returnees, in order to ensure the successful integration of minorities into Croatian society (Republic of Korea). 98. The following recommendations will be examined by Croatia, which will provide responses in due course, but no later than the 16th session of the Human Rights Council, in March 2011: 98.1. Consider ratifying the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families, in line with recommendation 1737 of 17 March 2006 adopted by the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe, to which Croatia is an active member (Algeria); 98.2. Ratify the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families (Argentina; The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia); 98.3. Sign the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families (Turkey); 98.4. Sign and ratify the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, and ratify the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance (Spain); 98.5. Follow up with their valuable work on human rights issues by ratifying the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance, and the 1961 Convention on the Reduction of Statelessness, and by accepting recommendations made by the Human Rights Council mechanisms (Hungary); 1 	The recommendation as made during the interactive dialogue was: “Continue its efforts in facilitating the return and reintegration of refugees and internally displaced Serbs, with particular focus on their legitimate housing rights”. 98.6. Adopt measures aimed at strengthening the work of the Council of National Minorities so as to address the situation of particularly vulnerable racial and ethnic groups (Argentina); 98.7. Continue with determination to promote and implement respect for all human rights, including within the framework of regional reconciliation and just solutions for the victims, and to do so in particular for those belonging to the ethnic minority and refugee communities (Serbia); 98.8. Reinforce its efforts to protect the rights of people with disabilities and to oversee the work of mental health residential facilities, and amend its legal framework to ensure that it contains human rights guarantees in line with international standards (Canada); 98.9. Intensify investigations of trafficking crimes in high tourism sectors and other areas with prostitution; aggressively prosecute traffickers (United States of America)2; 98.10. Take necessary measures in order to guarantee to everyone who requests it, including those belonging to minorities, access to legal aid  (France); 98.11. Amend the strict eligibility requirements of the Free Legal Aid Act so that all who need it can make use of its provisions (Netherlands); 98.12. Enact legislation to ensure that imprisonment is used only as a last resort when sentencing all juvenile offenders, ensure that they are held separately from adult offenders, and provide systematic resource realization support to them (Austria); 98.13. Initiate an independent inquiry on cases of torture and maltreatment relating to the years 1991–1995 (Italy); 98.14. Allocate additional resources to the State’s Prosecutor’s Office to ensure the full application of the Instructions it issued in October 2008 with regard to local war crimes proceedings (Netherlands); 98.15. Promote anti-discrimination through awareness-raising campaigns on legislation among workers, employers and the judiciary (Norway); 98.16. Develop programmes to raise awareness on legislation, in the area of gender equality between workers, employers and the judiciary, strengthen the existing measures, and promote new measures to combine family responsibilities with work (Spain); 98.17. Expedite the process of returning occupied private properties to their rightful owners, and promote the successful conclusion of ongoing legal proceedings by strengthening the applicable legal framework (Canada); 98.18. Strengthen the efforts aimed at ensuring equal access to citizenship (Poland), and ensure that the administrative procedures and legislative provisions on citizenship do not put at a disadvantage persons of non-Croat ethnic origin (Poland; Finland); 98.19. Increase measures to integrate ethnic Serb and Roma minorities into the fabric of Croatian life, including through a broadcast media campaign to communicate and strengthen themes of reconciliation and tolerance. Such a media campaign could also target the minority communities themselves with messages on how to address some of the issues that perpetuate discrimination, such as Roma-language broadcasts on birth registration, education and health services (United States); 98.20. Consider the offer by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to provide technical assistance and capacity-building in order to finalize the refugee return chapter and build an effective and efficient asylum system in Croatia (Norway)3; 98.21. Continue to promote partnerships between the authorities and civil society organizations, to complete the process of return of refugees and displaced persons, to solve the issue of housing accommodation, through accelerated accommodation of the former tenancy right holders and full implementation of the action plan to achieve progress in the implementation of the Housing Care Programme for former tenancy rights holders within and outside the areas of special state concern, as a precondition for the sustainable and dignified return of refugees and displaced persons (The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia); 98.22. Develop a national programme to follow up on the results of this universal periodic review (Mexico); 99. All conclusions and/or recommendations contained in the present report reflect the positions of the submitting State(s) and/or the State under review. They should not be construed as endorsed by the Working Group as a whole. 3 	The recommendation as made during the interactive dialogue was: “Consider the offer by the UNHCR to provide technical assistance and capacity building in order to finalize the refugee return chapter and build an effective and efficient asylum return chapter in Croatia”. Annex Composition of the delegation The delegation of Croatia was headed by His Excellency Andrej Plenkovi., State Secretary for European Integration, Ministry of Foreign Affairs and European Integration of the Republic of Croatia, and was composed of the following members: • Mr. Hrvoje .urko, Counsellor, Chargé d’Affaires a.i., Permanent Mission of the Republic of Croatia to the United Nations Office at Geneva; • Mr. Branko So.anac, M.S., Head of the Government Office for National Minorities; • Mr. Luka Ma.eri., Head of the Government Office for Human Rights; • Mrs. Helena .timac Radin, Head of the Government Office for Gender Equality; • Mr. Mario Nobilo, Director, Directorate for Multilateral Affairs, Ministry of Foreign Affairs and European Integration of the Republic of Croatia; • Mr. Kristian Turkalj, Director, Directorate for European Union and International Cooperation, Ministry of Justice of the Republic of Croatia; • Mrs. Tatjana Katki. Stani., Director, Directorate for Social Welfare, Ministry of Health and Social Welfare of the Republic of Croatia;  • Ms. Vesna Vukovi., Head of the United Nations Department, Ministry of Foreign Affairs and European Integration of the Republic of Croatia;  • Ms. Sonja .erjav, Head of Office of the State Secretary for European Integration of the Republic of Croatia; • Ms. Vesna 	Batisti. Kos, Head of the Department for Human Rights and International Organizations, Ministry of Foreign Affairs and European Integration of the Republic of Croatia; • Ms. Tamara 	.oki., Head of the Department for Human Rights and National Minority Rights, Ministry of Justice of the Republic of Croatia; • Ms. Gordana Valenta, Head of Sector for Administrative Affairs, Foreigners and Citizenship, Ministry of the Interior of the Republic of Croatia; • Mr. Mladen Pemper, Head of the Department for Terrorism, Criminal Police Directorate, Ministry of the Interior of the Republic of Croatia; • Ms. Danica Kramari., Head of the Health Care Department, Directorate for Medical Affairs; Ministry of Health and Social Welfare of the Republic of Croatia;  • Ms. Jadranka Huljev, Senior Counsellor, Ministry of Science, Education and Sport of the Republic of Croatia; • Ms. Romana 	Kuzmani. Olui., Counsellor, Department for Human Rights and International Organizations, Ministry of Foreign Affairs and European Integration of the Republic of Croatia; • Ms. Irena 	.a.i., Counsellor, Department for Human Rights and International Organizations, Ministry of Foreign Affairs and European Integration of the Republic of Croatia; • Ms. Lara Romano, Third Secretary, Permanent Mission of the Republic of Croatia to the United Nations Office at Geneva. 