United Nations 	A/HRC/13/13 Distr.: General 4 January 2010 Original: English General Assembly Human Rights Council Thirteenth session Agenda item 6 Universal Periodic Review Report of the Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review* Democratic People’s Republic of Korea * 	Previously issued under document  symbol A/HRC/WG.6/6/L.12; minor revisions have been added under the authority of the secretariat of the Human Rights Council on the basis of editorial changes made by States through the ad referendum procedure. The annex to the present report is circulated as received. Contents Paragraphs Page Introduction............................................................................................................. 1–4 3 I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process................................................ 5–89 3 A. Presentation by the State under review........................................................... 5–16 3 B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review........................ 17–89 4 II. Conclusions and/or recommendations..................................................................... 90–92 13 Annex Composition of the delegation ......................................................................................................... 24 Introduction 1. The Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review, established in accordance with Human Rights Council resolution 5/1 of 18 June 2007, held its sixth session from 30 November to 11 December 2009. The review of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea (DPRK) was held at the 11th meeting on 7 December 2009. The delegation of DPRK was headed by H.E. Mr. Ri Tcheul, Ambassador and Permanent Representative DPRK Mission in Geneva. At its 16th meeting held on 9 December 2009, the Working Group adopted the present report on DPRK. 2. On 7 September 2009, the Human Rights Council selected the following group of rapporteurs (troika) to facilitate the review of DPRK: Mexico, Norway, and South Africa. 3. In accordance with paragraph 15 of the annex to resolution 5/1, the following documents were issued for the review of DPRK: (a) A national report submitted/written presentation made in accordance with paragraph 15 (a) (A/HRC/WG.6/6/PRK/1); (b) A compilation prepared by the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR), in accordance with paragraph 15 (b) (A/HRC/WG.6/6/PRK/2); (c) A summary prepared by OHCHR, in accordance with paragraph 15 (c) (A/HRC/WG.6/6/PRK/3).  4. A list of questions prepared in advance by Argentina, Canada, Czech Republic, Denmark, Germany, Hungary, Ireland, Japan, Latvia, Norway, the Republic of Korea, the Netherlands, Sweden, Switzerland and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland was transmitted to DPRK through the troika. These questions are available on the extranet of the Working Group. I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process A. Presentation by the State under review 5. The delegation of DPRK stated that it appreciated this opportunity to participate in the sixth session of the Working Group.. As is known, at the Human Rights Council and the General Assembly the human rights situation of DPRK has been singled out for discussion every year out of purposes and motives irrelevant to genuine human rights, resulting in the adoption of the unjust “resolutions”. DPRK neither recognize nor accept such “resolutions”, and categorically reject them as the extreme manifestation of politicization, selectivity and double standards in the area of human rights. 6. However, DPRK has come to this session as it values the universal periodic review mechanism, which is impartially treating all United Nations Member States with different ideologies and systems, cultures and traditions. DPRK hopes that this session will serve as an excellent occasion for the international community to adopt a cooperative approach with a view to correctly understanding and impartially assessing the human rights ideas and policies DPRK people have chosen and the prevailing reality of the country.  7. DPRK has consistently maintained the principle of prioritizing human rights and honouring the United Nations Charter and the international human rights instruments. Its history has been the history of struggle to safeguard genuine human rights of its people. 8. Immediately after the liberation from colonial rule in 1945, DPRK laid down a framework for establishing a democratic judiciary, instituted and promulgated the Decrees on Land Reform, Nationalization of Industries, Labour, and on Sex Equality, and carried out democratic elections. 9. DPRK honourably safeguarded its system and dignity in the three-year war imposed by foreign forces just five years after the country’s liberation. After the war, which turned everything to ashes, DPRK took active steps to raise the people’s deteriorated material and cultural living standard to the pre-war level. Its Government, even during the hard time of the war, effected human rights policies including through enforcing universal medical care and taking steps for the relief of war victims. 10. The Government laid foundation for ensuring, to a greater extent, the enjoyment by people of their human rights in material and cultural life, which, in the 1980s reached a heyday in the country’s economic power and people’s living. However, dissolution of socialist market in the early 1990s and consequences of natural disasters that hit our country repeatedly from the mid 1990s negatively affected economic and cultural rights in general. 11. It was also at this time that military pressure and threats of aggression by hostile forces reached an extreme, compelling DPRK people to choose whether to “defend their independent lives or fall into slavery”. They have made tireless efforts in hearty response to the Songun leadership of the great General KIM JONG IL, and as a result the country acquired a strong war deterrent that can firmly safeguard their human rights system.  12. Today DPRK people, with ever more heightened honour and pride, are working devotedly to make the country an economic power and to guarantee the effective enjoyment of their human rights in economic, social and cultural sectors.  13. The DPRK is a socialist State guided by the great Juche idea, the essence of which is that people are the masters of everything and decide everything. Its sovereignty resides in the workers, peasants, servicepersons intellectuals and all other working people. The legal system that has embodied the Juche idea stipulates democratic rights and duties, as well as guarantees, ways and means for their realization.  14. Every individual citizen is entitled to enjoy human rights and the State is obliged to ensure those rights-this is one of the important features of the system for the protection and promotion of human rights in our country. 15. The Government of DPRK will in the near future create a firm guarantee for the ensuring on a higher standard of a more affluent and civilized life for its people, their human rights and fundamental freedoms.  16. Finally, the delegation noted it will participate in the interactive dialogue in a constructive and sincere approach, convinced that it will serve as an occasion to facilitate understanding of the human rights situation of DPRK. B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review 17. Fifty-two countries took the floor during the interactive dialogue. A number of countries recognized the significant achievements by DPRK in the fields of health, education, gender equality. The decision of the Government to actively participate in the universal periodic review process was welcomed, as was the decision to engage in a dialogue with the Committee on the Rights of the Child. The Government was encouraged to intensify its efforts with a view to achieve the MDGs by 2015. A number of natural disasters, which consecutively hit the country in the nineties, gravely affected the economic situation in addition to the loss of human life. Recommendations made during the interactive dialogue appear in section II of the present report. 18. Brazil considered DPRK’s participation in the UPR as an important step. It believes that through improved cooperation and genuine dialogue, including with Special Procedures, the UN and the international community would be able to assist the DPRK. Brazil asked about internal challenges to the promotion and protection of human rights and remained concerned about allegations of executions in political detention camps and the disparities in public distribution of food. Brazil hoped that DPRK authorities would reestablish full-fledged investigations on the abduction of Japanese nationals 19. Japan noted certain positive steps undertaken by DPRK such as engaging in dialogue with the Committee on the Rights of the Child and cooperating with UNICEF to improve health situation and quality education for children. Japan expressed its regret that DPRK did not fully respond to the various concerns of international community including punishment against those citizens expelled or returned from abroad, public executions, the abduction issue and the issue of detention facilities. Japan was also concerned about those who are suffering. 20. The Republic of Korea noted the recent positive efforts of DPRK to engage with the Committee on the Rights of the Child and to stipulate in the Constitution that the State shall respect and protect human rights. However, it remained concerned about the detention in political prison camps and violations of the freedoms of movement, expression, thought and religion; a huge gap between the recognition of human rights in legal codes and their actual implementation, and the situations of separated families, prisoners of war and abductees. It urged the Government to take all necessary measures at the grassroots level to uphold human rights and fundamental freedoms enshrined in the Constitution and domestic laws as well as in human rights treaties such as ICCPR, ICESCR, CEDAW and CRC, to which DPRK is a party. It strongly encouraged the Government to accept the technical assistance offered by OHCHR. 21. Cuba noted that the imposition of a Special Rapporteur and the political manipulation vis à vis DPRK does not lead to cooperation and dialogue. DPRK is a developing country, victim of imperialistic aggressive policies, and recurring natural disasters. DPRK works to consolidate a socialist and just society, which guarantees equality and social justice. Cuba highlighted, inter alia, the existence of a universal and free health system, the elimination of illiteracy and access to education for all. 22. The United States of America was concerned by reports on allegations of extrajudicial execution, torture, systematic deprivation of due process and of forced labour. It referred to the lack of remedies or transparent accountability in dealing with allegations of abuse and expressed concern about reports of violence against women. Urging DPRK to grant access to the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in DPRK, it enquired about efforts to deal with these issues.  23. Belgium noted the recent inclusion of human rights in the Constitution, but remained concerned by reports on the situation of political prisoners and the conditions of detention. It asked what mechanisms of control exist to ensure human conditions of detention specifically in camps of political prisoners. It asked about specific measures taken to combat food shortages. 24. Algeria requested more information about the Juche concept. It welcomed efforts to promote the right to education, which have allowed achieving the MDG for primary education for all. Algeria referred to difficulties in realizing the right to food, including for children suffering from malnutrition, due to natural disasters, famine and appeal the international community to provide DPRK population with food assistance. 25. The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela noted that DPRK has an index of 100 per cent of children attending primary school, compulsory, universal and free of charge, and at secondary school, eradicating completely the illiteracy in the country. 26. Pakistan noted that DPRK is party to core human rights instruments and that its Constitution guarantees full enjoyment of human rights. Pakistan appreciated the system of ensuring full access to health and education services, the strong emphasis on human rights education and the commitment to international cooperation on human rights through cooperative dialogue. 27. Belarus welcomed the determination of DPRK to achieve progressive realisation of material and cultural well-being of its nation. Belarus commended the efforts of DPRK in ensuring the principle of universal access to medical services and education. Belarus found it important that DPRK has continued its efforts to ensure food security in the country. 28. Turkey believed that acceding to CAT and cooperating with special procedures, including the Special Rapporteur on DPRK, will help the authorities address some shortcomings. Turkey shared the Secretary-General’s recommendation that DPRK extend free and full access to United Nations agencies and other humanitarian actors and asked about DPRK’s views on measures to enable it to benefit from OHCHR technical assistance. 29. Malaysia noted with encouragement the Government’s concerted efforts aimed to build a progressive and prosperous nation by 2012. It also encouraged DPRK to extend its engagement with the international community to address the many challenges it faces with a view to improve the overall human rights situation in the country.  30. The Syrian Arab Republic commended efforts to protect and promote all human rights and noted that the complete and universal free medical care and education and the law on gender equality show that DPRK is on the right track to achieve development despite illegal sanctions imposed on it. 31. Thailand noted that the Constitution contains provisions on human rights and that some domestic laws and policies have been adopted to protect specific groups. Health care and education are central parts of the social policies. It encouraged the country to do its utmost to address human rights and humanitarian concerns with a view to improving the well-being of its people. 32. France asked about reasons for imposing criminal sanctions on people who try to leave the country and about the number of persons condemned to death and executed over the last three years. France noted that freedom of expression is limited and systematically violated and enquired about the number of persons incarcerated for political reasons. It hoped that the right to food for the entire population be ensured. 33. Australia noted DPRK’s engagement with CRC, the drafting of a 2008-2010 work programme for persons with disabilities and cooperation with the UNFPA as positive developments. However, it remained disappointed by the Government’s refusal to engage with many other aspects of the United Nations system and the international community. 34. Sri Lanka enquired about the four unique characteristics of human rights mentioned in the national report and hoped that international mechanisms, based on mutual respect, domestic requirements and understanding, would facilitate DPRK efforts to enhance an environment conducive to continued improvement of human rights.  35. Myanmar welcomed efforts to attain the goal to build an economic power by 2012. Myanmar commended DPRK for tangible progress in ensuring the rights to education and health. It asked DPRK to further elaborate on the realization of universal free education at primary level. Myanmar encouraged DPRK to share lessons learned from its experience in training medical personnel. 36. Nicaragua highlighted DPRK’s legal and institutional framework which guarantees fundamental human rights to its citizens. It encouraged DPRK to continue strengthening the system of promotion and protection of human rights, in observance of the principles enshrined in the Charter and international human rights instruments.  37. The United Kingdom noted with concern the range of grave human rights problems raised in the stakeholders report. It inquired about the right to a fair trial and the prohibition of torture and about the ways to address the shortage of medicines.  38. The Libyan Arab Jamahiriya mentioned that the Constitution guaranteed the respect of human rights and the necessity to take measures to that end and that the national report referred to the objective of achieving equality and dignity for all. 39. Mexico acknowledged progress achieved on health, education and gender equality in employment, despite the many challenges stemming from the deterioration of the economy, natural disasters and food scarcity. Mexico enquired about measures adopted to follow up on alleged of enforced disappearances and abductions. 40. The Islamic Republic of Iran noted the measures taken particularly in the field of economic, social and cultural rights and encouraged DPRK to intensify its efforts to achieve the MDGs. It recommended that the international community help DPRK to secure adequate food for its people. It noted with interest the special attention paid to improving the situation of women and children. 41. The delegation of DPRK noted that the Constitution provides in article 67 that citizens have the freedom of assembly, demonstration and association, and the State shall provide conditions for the free activities of democratic political parties and social organizations. Assemblies and demonstrations are permitted regardless of their forms and purposes unless they are contrary to the democratic principle and public order. 42. Freedom of opinion and expression are also constitutional rights. No civil servant or law enforcement official can restrict or suppress these rights. Any slight manifestation of restriction or persecution of these rights may invite public criticism or denunciation, and in serious cases, lead to legal punishment. 43. The Constitution provides in article 68 that citizens have freedom of religious belief, and these rights are granted by the State by approving the setting up of religious buildings and holding of religious ceremonies. The State treats all religions equally and does not interfere in the setting up and operating of religious buildings, nor in the organization of religious bodies and their activities. Citizens are free to believe in religion of their choice.  44. On alleged classifying people into categories and practicing discrimination, the Constitution provides in article 65 that citizens have equal rights in all fields of State and public life. Such practices are inconceivable. No one is privileged or particularly disadvantaged in their access to material and cultural conditions. 45. On the issue of “political prisoners’ camps”, the delegation noted that freedoms of speech, press, assembly and demonstration and freedom of religious belief are the fundamental rights guaranteed by the Constitution. Exercising the rights to such freedom can never be criminalized. Thoughts and political views are not something that can be controlled by the law. The term “political prisoner” does not exist in DPRK’s vocabulary, and therefore the so-called political prisoners’ camps do not exist. There are reform institutions, which are called prisons in other countries. Those who are sentenced to the penalty of reform through labour for committing anti-State crimes or other crimes prescribed in the Criminal Law serve their terms at the reform institutions. 46. Regarding the relations between Songun politics and enjoyment of economic, social and cultural rights, DPRK is pursuing the Songun politics to safeguard the supreme interests of the State and secure firm guarantee for the safeguarding of the life and well.being of its people. Songun politics also makes great contributions to the economic development and the improving of people’s living. 47. On specific measures the Government is taking to secure sufficient food for the population, the t DPRK has limited arable land, with 80 per cent of its land made up of mountainous areas. Moreover, the consecutive natural disasters during the past several years stood in the way of providing sufficient food to our people. The Government gave top priority to the solution of food problem, took a series of practical measures and put a lot of efforts into their implementation. The food aid provided by different countries and international organizations over the years greatly encouraged people in their efforts for the solution of food shortage. DPRK will, in the near future, meet the domestic demands for food on its own. 48. On the access to the sites of assistance by international aid agencies, the delegate noted that the principle of “no access, no aid” is a commonly recognized universal principle in cooperation activities of the international organizations including specialized agencies of the United Nations. In accordance with this principle, the Government has provided all necessary arrangements including on-site visits for the aid agencies operating in the country and will do so, in the future, too. 49. On cooperation with Special Rapporteur and other international human rights bodies, the delegation noted that the human rights situation of DPRK is selectively tabled and discussed every year at the Human Rights Council and General Assembly, resulting in the adoption of the unjust “resolution” thereon. The Special Rapporteur on DPRK mandated by the “resolution” also continues to present reports that decry the DPRK system and policies based on distorted information. For these reasons, DPRK totally rejects the “resolution” and does not accept the mandate of the Special Rapporteur. The DPRK will, in the future, too, reject the confrontational “resolution” and politicization of human rights and will strive to make genuine dialogue and cooperation a reality. It will also faithfully implement its obligations under the international human rights instruments, and thus do everything to ensure that its people enjoy full range of human rights and fundamental freedoms under any circumstances. 50. On accession to the international human rights instruments, the delegate noted that the greatest obstacle here is the selectivity and double standard applied continuously to the country on the United Nations human rights arena. However, it does not mean that DPRK is opposed to the purposes and requirements of the international human rights instruments. Although DPRK is not yet a party to several human rights instruments including the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and the Convention against Torture, their requirements are, in fact, incorporated in the national laws and implemented. Once the obstacles are removed and appropriate conditions and circumstances provided, DPRK will voluntarily accede to the conventions and protocols, not upon any request. 51. Viet Nam acknowledged efforts for the protection of the rights of women, children, persons with disability and the elderly, and the guarantee of health and education. Vietnam expressed readiness to share its experience with DPRK related to the cooperation with international community to solve humanitarian issues and development of agriculture and the guarantee of food security. 52. China appreciated that the Constitution and laws provide for respect for human rights. It noted that the protection and promotion of human rights are priority tasks of various State organs. DPRK has good educational and health-care systems and strategies are in place for the attainment of the MDGs. China called on the international community to provide humanitarian development assistance and support efforts of the Government to develop economy and improve peoples’ life. 53. Zimbabwe noted the strides to improve the overall standards of living. DPRK has faced a number of challenges in implementing some of the rights, mainly due to some global economic and political factors. 54. Israel stressed that as a party to ICCPR, CRC, ICESCR and CEDAW, DPRK has an obligation to adhere to its international commitments and protect and promote human rights. 55. Indonesia enquired about plans of the Governments to accede to other core human rights instruments. Indonesia called upon DPRK to give due consideration to the legitimate concerns related to unresolved abduction cases, and in particular to speed up efforts to resolve them.  56. Norway recognized efforts on gender equality, child rights and legislative reforms. It noted that children face discrimination based on social origin and was concerned about State sanctioned extrajudicial activities. It appreciated that DPRK is a party to several human rights instruments and expressed deep concern about respect of the rights to freedom of opinion, expression, association and peaceful assembly. It enquired about legislative reforms, disparity in access to food, visits to detention facilities and the treatment of returnees.  57. Slovenia raised questions related to ratification of human rights treaties; plans for human rights education in schools, work place and legal community; human rights training for judiciary and law enforcement officials; the effect of the background of a child in access to education, food, health, jobs, marriage and party membership, measures for elimination of the use of forced abortions, measures for improvement of prison conditions. 58. Qatar noted that DPRK is a party to a number of human rights instruments, and hoped for more progress in the dialogue with the international community, on the basis of mutual respect. It encouraged DPRK to continue its efforts to promote and protect human rights, particularly economic and social rights, which will contribute to achieving the MDGs. 59. Yemen noted DPRK’s political will to achieve gender equality through legislation, free education for all, especially women and the provision of special services to women at the work place. DPRK is party to a number of international instruments. 60. Austria asked if the Government has any plans to effectively implement its obligations under the treaties it is party to. It was concerned by many reported cases of disappearances of political dissidents. 61. Germany requested information about how DPRK followed up on the measures urged by the Special Rapporteur on DPRK with regard to the consequences of the Korean War of 1950-1953, including the issues of missing persons and the reunification of families separated by the war. 62. Canada noted the emphasis placed on the provision of free universal medical care and welcomed the recent revision of the Constitution. Canada expressed concerns regarding to the overall lack of basic freedoms in DPRK and the humanitarian situation, in particular the chronic food shortage and inadequate access to safe drinking water. 63. The Netherlands expressed concerns related to reports on the possible use of torture, including inhuman condition of detention, public executions, extrajudicial and arbitrary detention, the absence of due process and the imposition of the death penalty for political and religious reasons. It was concerned about the safety and well being of nationals who have returned to the country, and food security of the population. 64. Chile expressed concern about reported extrajudicial executions carried out in public and in detention camps, discrimination in access to education, practice of forced labour and violence against women. It was concerned about kidnappings and enforced disappearance of individuals. 65. The Lao People’s Democratic Republic noted progress in promoting economic, social and cultural rights and in addressing food security. It hoped that the Government will continue to fulfil its tasks of eradication of poverty and improving food security. 66. Sweden noted the cooperation of DPRK with the Committee on the Rights of the Child and collaboration with UNICEF and WHO to improve children’s health and education. Sweden expressed concerns regarding reports on forced labour, severe limits to freedom of information and reported restrictions to small-patch farming. 67. Italy was concerned about reports on public and extrajudicial executions and persecution for practicing a religion. It expressed concerns about reports of forced labour, very often involving children, despite the law prohibiting forced or compulsory labour and criminalizing child labour. 68. Ireland stressed that there is a genuine alarm at the extent of human suffering caused by human rights violations in DPRK. The Human Rights Council and the United Nations have the responsibility to continue paying close attention to these issues. It requested information about administration of justice issues and expressed a concern about persecution for practicing religion. 69. India noted that DPRK was commended by some treaty-bodies for its policy of providing 11 years of free compulsory education and its primary health care strategy. Concerns have been expressed about the quality of education, the severe impact of malnutrition on children, and the shortages and disparities in access to food. India requested information about plans to establish a national human rights institution, making easier travel abroad, and regular reunions of separated families. 70. Poland enquired about measures to secure the full enjoyment of the religious freedom. It referred to the existence of a large number of prison camps, the extensive use of forced labour and the harsh conditions imposed by the criminal justice system, giving rise to a plethora of abuses.  71. New Zealand expressed concerns about restrictions on freedoms of religion, expression, peaceful assembly and association, the right to privacy, equal access to information and the right to take part in the conduct of public affairs. The situation in labour camps, the incarceration of dissidents and their families and the continued use of torture, including public executions were matters of concern. It called on DPRK to work constructively with the Special Rapporteur on DPRK to help resolve human rights issues together. 72. Palestine noted that the Constitution guarantees full enjoyment of human rights to all citizens and that knowledge of human rights of the general public is high. Palestine appreciated the system of ensuring full access to health and education services and the commitment to international cooperation on human rights through positive dialogue. 73. Philippines noted achievements in education and women’s participation in economic, political, social and cultural life. Philippines enquired about the further plans to promote gender equality and the rights of women, and establish a national human rights institution. 74. Nigeria was encouraged that the Constitution provides protection of human rights. It was concerned on alleged human rights violations and hoped that the Government would address them. It supported the initiative of direct engagement by all to assist the government providing the enabling environment for the full enjoyment of human rights. 75. Spain mentioned that the Secretary-General noted with concern that the Government has not taken any significant initiative to end the systematic human rights violations. It requested information regarding practical measures to put an end to the early militarization of children in schools. 76. Lithuania made recommendations on implementation of international obligations, cooperation with international organisations on human rights, protection of rights of children and women, and death penalty. 77. Greece enquired about measures to ensure women’s rights and address the problem of violence against women, to ensure citizens’ right to movement and to give access to the Special Rapporteur on DPRK and WFP. 78. Switzerland called upon the Government to undertake the implementation of international standards, put an end to human rights violations and prosecute those responsible for such abuses. It invited DPRK to cooperate actively with the international community. It noted restrictions on freedom of movement. It also indicated that the state distribution system is not in a position to guarantee acceptable living conditions for the population. 79. Hungary noted the importance of cooperation with OHCHR and enquired about plans to cooperate with United Nations mechanisms. It was concerned about restrictions on freedoms of religion and expression, the right to free access to information and freedom of movement. It considered that the DPRK failed to implement treaty bodies’ recommendations and regretted that the family reunification process was stopped. 80. On establishing an independent human rights mechanism, the delegation noted that in DPRK much of the work for the protection and promotion of human rights are the responsibilities of the people’s committees at all levels, which are the people’s power organs. Dealing with complaints and petitions fairly are one of the functions of the people’s committees. The functions of the people’s power organs for the protection and promotion of human rights are not in conflict with the Paris Principle. However, DPRK will pay due attention to the establishing of independent human rights mechanism and conduct in-depth study in this regard. 81. On the issue of separated families, prisoners of war and abductions, the delegate noted that the Government of DPRK has consistently put forward initiatives and made sincere efforts to relieve the pains of the families and their relatives.  In particular, following the inter-Korean summit meeting on 15 July, 2000, reunions and video meetings of the separated families and relatives have been arranged scores of times. The issue of prisoners of war was already settled at the time of exchange of prisoners of war in accordance with the Armistice Agreement, and the issue of abduction does not exist. Solution of all problems between the north and the south lies in faithfully translating the June 15th Joint Declaration and the October 4th Declaration into reality in the spirit of “by our nation itself”. 82. The delegation commented on the concerns expressed about women and children suffering from continued malnutrition and in particular about violence against women and children. The country suffered from serious economic difficulties starting from the mid.1990s, causing serious deterioration of the people’s health, in particular women and children. Supply of nutritious foods, nutritional and medical care, significantly improved the situation from the early 2000s. The issue of serious malnutrition is a thing of the past. Regarding the alleged forced enrolment of children in quasi-military organizations, the delegation stated that Children’s Unions are autonomous organizations of children aged 9 to 13 through which children, with the help of their school administration board, arrange excursions, visits, field practices and other extracurricular activities. Allegations that DPRK conscripts children from and early age and militarizes them are very distorted information.  83. On the issue of abduction of Japanese nationals, the delegation noted that on 17 September 2002, DPRK-Japan Pyongyang Declaration was adopted during the visit of the Japanese Prime Minister. In the declaration, DPRK side affirmed that it would take appropriate measures to prevent the recurrence of such unhappy issue. Thereafter, a special committee was formed, nationwide investigations were conducted and the result thereof was informed to the Japanese side. DPRK has faithfully fulfilled its obligations under the various DPRK-Japan agreements in the spirit of the Pyongyang Declaration, which resulted in the complete settlement of the abduction issue.  84. On the independence and impartiality of the judiciary, the delegation mentioned that the correct understanding of this issue can be provided through systematic interpretation of the relevant provisions of the Constitution of the DPRK, namely articles 11, 164, 166 and 168.  The Central Court is held accountable before the Supreme People’s Assembly or the Presidium of the Supreme People’s Assembly not for the judicial proceedings, namely hearing of and passing judgement on cases, but for the administrative work related to justice, that is, recruitment and training of personnel and logistics. The Supreme People’s Assembly under no circumstances can get involved or interfere in the treatment of individual cases, that is, judiciary proceedings. With regard to the leadership of the ruling Workers’ Party of Korea, its organizations can not operate outside the Constitution, as the Party itself exists within the State. The guidance of the Party over the judiciary is a policy guidance to ensure independence and law observance in the judicial activities.  85. On torture, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, the delegate noted that Criminal Law of the DPRK in its article 253 defines as crimes such acts as interrogating persons by torture or other illegal methods and exaggerating or fabricating cases. The Criminal Procedures Law prohibits forcing a person to admit an offence by such coercive and conciliatory methods as torture or leading a statement, and provides that statements obtained by such methods are inadmissible as evidences. Any transgression of the regulations is liable to legal punishment of the person responsible. In DPRK, reform and detention facilities are operated by the people’s security organs, which were visited in the 1990s by some international NGOs including Amnesty International and some Western personnel. 86. Regarding the cause of refugee outflows and “punishment” of people upon their return or repatriation, the delegate stated that the illegal border crossing in the northern border area of the country is, in nature, not the issue to be assessed in the light of the 1951 Convention or 1967 Protocol on the Status of Refugees. In the mid-1990s the practices of illegal border crossing suddenly appeared due to economic reasons triggered by various factors. To cope with the situation, the government took a series of proactive measures. People’s power organs in the border areas conducted in-depth survey into the economically disadvantaged families and provided them with special support. In addition, the power organs made all necessary arrangements for the people to visit their relatives in the north.eastern part of China upon their request.  87. Regarding women and human trafficking, the delegate welcomed international efforts to prevent and punish human trafficking and victims. DPRK strongly guard against the occurrence of such practices in the country. There are some people linked to outside forces seeking profit from human trafficking. DPRK is strongly against these practices and competent institutions are doing their best to identify and take necessary measures.  88. Regarding public executions, in some very exceptional cases, there are public executions for those criminals who committed very brutal violent crimes. These requests are often made by the families and relatives of the victims. In DPRK, death penalty is applied in very strictly limited crimes.  89. On the alleged systematic violation of human rights, the delegate noted that, should anyone study the laws and regulations of DPRK, it would be clear that human rights violations are not systematic. This allegation is based on distorted facts or fabrication. Negative assessments of the human rights situation in DPRK are based on misinformation fabricated by those who betrayed their country.  II. Conclusions and/or recommendations 90. The following recommendations will be examined by DPRK which will provide responses in due time. The response of DPRK to these recommendations will be included in the outcome report to be adopted by the Human Rights Council at its 13th session: 1. Ratify the Convention on the Elimination of the Worst Forms of Child Labour (ILO Convention No. 182), CED, ICERD, CAT and its Optional Protocol, the ICRMW and CRPD (Chile); 2. Consider ratification of CRPD (Philippines); 3. Fully comply with the principles and rights enshrined in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the two international covenants, the CRC and CEDAW, to which it is a party (Slovenia); 4. Ratify core universal human rights instruments, in particular, ICERD and CAT, and fulfil its treaty obligations (Brazil); 5. Ratify the fundamental human rights conventions such as ICERD or the optional protocols to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (Hungary); 6. Consider signing/ratifying the remaining international human rights instruments, including ICERD and ICRMW (Nigeria); 7. Become a party to CAT and take the necessary national measures to comply with its provisions (United Kingdom); 8. Ratify CAT (Turkey); 9. Ratify CAT and its Optional Protocol (Poland); 10. Consider joining ILO and accede to and implement its core conventions, in particular Nos. 29, 105 and 182, on child and forced labour (Brazil); 11. Join ILO and accede to its core instruments and extend an open invitation, and without restrictions, to ILO officials to analyze the situation of workers’ rights in the country (Spain); 12. Join ILO and ratify core conventions, particularly Nos. 105, 182 and 138, and allow related monitoring by ILO staff (United States); 13. Consider signing all the core international human rights instruments (Pakistan); 14. Seriously consider ratification of other existing human rights treaties (Slovenia); 15. Undertake a review of national criminal and immigration legislation to ensure its compatibility with international obligations of the Government, in particular regarding the right to freedom of movement of individuals, in response to the recommendations of the Committees on Civil and Political Rights, on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and on the Rights of the Child (Mexico); 16. Amend the Labour Law of the Industrial Complex of Kaesong and incorporate the minimum age of 18 years for work hazardous to the health, security or morality of minors (Spain); 17. Review its legal and administrative measures with a view to ensuring the dignity and better living conditions of the vulnerable groups, including women and children (Malaysia); 18. Take the measures that it deems appropriate to ensure, as soon as possible, the harmonization of its national legislation with international human rights instruments to which it is a party, and envisage acceding to other fundamental human rights instruments such as CRPD (Algeria); 19. Pass legislation specifically dealing with violence against women, including domestic violence, providing for prosecution of individuals committing acts of violence against women (United States); 20. Increase the number of women in management posts and in decision-making processes and envisage establishing full legislative provisions to promote and protect the rights of women (Algeria); 21. Systematically implement the ratified human rights treaties with the assistance of relevant Special Rapporteurs and OHCHR (Austria); 22. Enhance efforts to implement all international human rights obligations it has undertaken (Lithuania); 23. Fulfil its obligations assumed in several conventions to which it is a party, and if it deems useful, request the assistance of the international community (Hungary); 24. Adopt fully the rights-based approach in the development of future legislation (Nigeria); 25. Create a national human rights institution, seek accreditation from the International Coordinating Committee of National Institutions and accept technical assistance from OHCHR in setting up this national institution (United States); 26. Strengthen its national institutions for the promotion and protection of human rights (Nigeria); 27. Create a government task force to create protection programmes, provide resources for recovery and promote prevention through education and media campaigns (United States); 28. Maintain and strengthen its economic, political and social model chosen by its people in a sovereign manner and continue advancing in its efforts to increasingly build a just and more participative society (Cuba); 29. Continue its efforts aiming at achieving an environment of non.politicization, cooperation and dialogue in the human rights field (Cuba); 30. Continue its efforts in ensuring economic and social rights (Viet Nam); 31. Continue the implementation of the National Action Plan of Education for All, with a view to improving the quality of the system of 11 years of compulsory, free, universal education, increasing progressively the necessary resources allocated for this purpose (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela); 32. Continue to increase and diversify agricultural production by resorting to agricultural strategies, which could be based on models of production that have proven to be worthwhile (Algeria); 33. Continue to strengthen economic, social and cultural development with full participation of the population in public and security affairs, boost socio.economic development, industrialization and modernization, and achieve the Millennium Development Goals (Laos); 34. Continue its cooperation with the international community in solving humanitarian issues of mutual concern (Viet Nam); 35. Continue to promote and protect economic, social and cultural rights of its people, with greater emphasis on economic development (Sri Lanka); 36. Provide human rights education to all citizens and provide human rights training to judges, prosecutors and lawyers and law enforcement officials (Slovenia); 37. Take concrete measures aiming at fostering a genuine human rights culture with due regard to national and regional particularities as well as historical, cultural and religious backgrounds (Islamic Republic of Iran); 38. Ensure that the rights of women, children and persons with disabilities are more effectively realized through the implementation of the strategy for the promotion of reproductive health, 2006- 2010, the national strategy for the prevention of AIDS, 2008-2012, the primary health care strategy, 2008-2012, the national action plan for the well-being for children, 2001-2010 and the comprehensive action plan for persons with disabilities, 2008-2012 (Syrian Arab Republic); 39. Continue reporting on the implementation of human rights treaties to which it is a party (Slovenia); 40. Submit its pending reports to the relevant treaty bodies (Pakistan); 41. Improve its cooperation with the United Nations treaty bodies by agreeing on timelines for submitting overdue reports, in particular to the Human Rights Committee and the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women (Norway); 42. Cooperate with the special rapporteurs and other United Nations human rights mechanisms by granting them access to the country (Republic of Korea); 43. Invite the Special Rapporteur on freedom of religion or belief to visit the country and fully cooperate with her (Italy); 44. Agree to the requests for visit by the Special Rapporteur on the right to food (Norway); 45. Invite the Special Rapporteur on violence against women and the Special Rapporteur on torture to visit the country and provide more extensive recommendations (United States); 46. Fully cooperate with all human rights mechanisms, including accession to CAT, as well as access to the territory for the Special Rapporteur on torture (Belgium); 47. Positively consider requests for country visits of special procedures of the Council and implement the recommendations stemming from United Nations human rights mechanisms (Brazil); 48. Grant access to the three thematic Special Rapporteurs who have requested a visit (United Kingdom); 49. Respond favourably to the request of special procedures mandate-holders to enter the country and cooperate with special procedures and other human rights mechanisms (Slovenia); 50. Invite the special procedures mandate holders who have requested visits (Turkey); 51. Cooperate and engage in dialogue within the United Nations human rights mechanisms, including with the Special Rapporteurs and the High Commissioner for Human Rights (Japan); 52. Work with the Special Rapporteur on freedom of religion to ensure that its international human rights obligations under article 18 of ICCPR are fully implemented (Ireland); 53. Continue to cooperate and strengthen its human rights dialogue with relevant international human rights mechanisms (Pakistan); 54. Pursue cooperation with the thematic procedures of the Council, based on the principles of objectivity, impartiality and non-politicisation (Zimbabwe); 55. Continue cooperation and strengthen human rights dialogue with relevant international human rights mechanisms despite all obstacles and existing challenges while remaining confident of its will and its way to proceed according to its needs and national priorities (Palestine); 56. Respect and ensure the rights set forth in CRC of each child without discrimination of any kind (Slovenia); 57. Take necessary measures to ensure the right of a child to life and development without discrimination of any kind (Sweden); 58. Strengthen its efforts to promote gender equality and the rights of women (Philippines); 59. Invest sufficient resources to promote and protect the principle of equality in the fields of work, education and health (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya); 60. Provide all children with equal opportunities to study and give them access to higher education based on their talent and individual capability (Norway); 61. Continue giving priority to vulnerable groups in the distribution of international assistance (Yemen); 62. Continue preventing and punishing human rights abuses by law enforcement officials (Belarus); 63. Continue to achieve its objective of establishing a society free from crimes (Belarus); 64. In line with previous recommendations made by the Committee on the Rights of the Child, make every effort to reinforce protection of the right to life and development of all children (Germany); 65. Enact specific legislation to punish violence against women and establish structures for the protection of victims (Chile); 66. Enhance protection of rights of women and children, in particular those in the most vulnerable situations (Lithuania); 67. Take further measures to prohibit all forms of violence against children and women (Brazil); 68. Strengthen measures, including through international dialogue and cooperation, to combat human trafficking and provide appropriate assistance to victims of trafficking (Philippines); 69. Step up measures to comprehensively address the problem of trafficking and violence against women, including by increasing public awareness campaigns (Malaysia); 70. Continue to achieve its objective of establishing respect for law in society (Belarus); 71. Provide unlimited access to ICRC to all detention facilities in the country (Netherlands); 72. Give all in detention a fair trial (Norway); 73. Train professionals involved in the judicial system on the relevant international standards on a fair trial and rule of law (Sweden); 74. Ensure that all persons deprived of their liberty are treated with humanity and with respect for the inherent dignity of the human being (Poland); 75. Guarantee separated families’ fundamental right to know the fate of their family members across the border and to communicate and regularly meet together (Republic of Korea); 76. Do everything possible, in cooperation with the Republic of Korea, to ensure that the maximum number of meetings of separated families is organized (Switzerland); 77. Take concrete steps to continue the process of family reunification, because for the elder generation even a delay of one or two years means that their chance of seeing their relatives may be lost forever (Hungary); 78. Adopt measures to facilitate family reunification as recommended by the Special Rapporteur on DPRK (Germany); 79. Allow the exercise of the right to the freedom of expression and the freedom of association and assembly, by fostering and facilitating civil society entities and enabling them to obtain status under law (Israel); 80. Decriminalize the practice of leaving the country without permission or at least allow free movement of citizens within the country (Greece); 81. Pay special attention to the recommendations of the Human Rights Committee in the field of freedom of movement, including the right to leave the country (Hungary); 82. Decriminalize unauthorized travel (Switzerland); 83. Ensure full respect for the rights to freedom of association, expression, religion or belief and movement (Canada); 84. Take further steps to support freedom of expression and the right to freedom of movement (New Zealand); 85. Allow more freedom of movement of the people and foreigners in the country as a way to generate economic activities (Malaysia); 86. Consider, as appropriate, increasing the percentage of representation of women in the supreme People’s Assembly and other State decision-making bodies (Sri Lanka); 87. Provide more opportunities for women to gain access to leading positions in both the political and economic spheres and strengthen funding and visibility of the national institutions that promote gender equality (Norway); 88. Continue efforts to reinvigorate the national economy by, inter alia, allowing more freedom for people to engage in economic and commercial activities (Malaysia); 89. Make every possible effort to ensure access to food for the entire population (Chile); 90. Secure the right to food for all its citizens, especially so as to secure the right to health for children (Japan); 91. Continue taking measures to ensure the right to food for its people and implement MDGs (Viet Nam); 92. Take the necessary steps to ensure impartial access to adequate food, drinking water and other basic necessities for all people within its jurisdiction, including vulnerable groups (Canada); 93. Address concerns of the international community, including shortage of food, medical and other humanitarian services (Philippines); 94. Allocate resources equitably and implement food security policies, including through sustainable agricultural practices and reduced State restrictions on the cultivation and trade of foodstuffs (New Zealand); 95. Continue to address the negative impact on the promotion and protection of human rights, as inflicted by external coercive measures (Islamic Republic of Iran); 96. Strengthen measures to facilitate access and effective distribution of international humanitarian aid to the people in need, with special attention to vulnerable groups (Mexico); 97. Give access to food and other essential products to those who need them, taking into account the particular needs of children and pregnant and nursing women, and cooperate constructively with humanitarian agencies and other humanitarian actors by ensuring them access to all the territory (Switzerland); 98. Intensify its efforts to promote and protect the human rights of specific groups within society, such as women, children, disabled persons and the elderly, with a view to empowering them and alleviating their vulnerability (Thailand); 99. Take positive measures to further reduce infant mortality rates and maternal mortality rates (Syrian Arab Republic); 100. Take measures to improve the quality of health services deteriorated due to lack of medical facilities and medicine (Islamic Republic of Iran); 101. Work on the enhancement of the free health care programme and free primary education, obtaining the necessary assistance through international cooperation (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya); 102. Ensure that high goals of economic development by 2012 contribute to bringing about a decisive turn in the promotion and protection of human rights (Islamic Republic of Iran); 103. Increase resources allocated to the education sector for better quality of education and encourage the authorities to continue their efforts in this area (Algeria); 104. Grant access to international humanitarian agencies such as WFP (Netherlands); 105. Allow WFP to access those in need (Greece); 106. Grant full access to WFP to ensure food reaches the most vulnerable, and adopt other measures to promote the right to food including economic reforms to incentivize those working in the agricultural sector to increase production (United Kingdom); 107. Grant immediate access without obstacles to international humanitarian agencies, including WFP, as well as the Special Rapporteur on the right to food, in order to allow the resumption of necessary operations for food supply and to ensure that aid is distributed on the basis of the genuine needs of the people (Belgium); 108. Allow humanitarian agencies to resume food assistance and grant WFP full, safe and unhindered access to the country in order to monitor aid distribution (Canada); 109. Grant greater access to WHO and international NGOs working in the health field (United Kingdom); 110. Consider positively OHCHR offers of technical assistance and cooperate with the Human Rights Council special procedures in support of national efforts in this regard (Mexico); 111. Accept the advisory services offered by OHCHR (Chile); 112. Seek to continue to provide satisfactory conditions of operation to the United Nations aid agencies working in the country (Sri Lanka); 113. Continue engaging members of the international donor community in capacity-building in the field of economic and social rights (Malaysia); 114. Strengthen its cooperation with the United Nations and its mechanisms on human rights and humanitarian matters with a view to building national capacities and improving the people’s well-being (Thailand); 115. Work on overcoming the obstacles related to economic problems and the scarcity of resources through cooperation with the international community and the United Nations so as to ensure the promotion and protection of human rights (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya); 116. Continue to seek constructive cooperation with international mechanisms and other countries in areas of human rights in a non-confrontational and non-politicized manner (Zimbabwe); 117. Continue to cooperate with the United Nations, other international organizations and the world community to settle all the humanitarian issues (Lao People’s Democratic Republic). 91. The following recommendations did not enjoy the support of DPRK: 1. Sign and ratify CAT, establish judicial oversight over all prison facilities and take immediate action with a view to the elimination of all forms of torture by the security forces and prison personnel (Austria); 2. Implement its obligations under the human rights instruments to which it is party and cease the use of arbitrary detention, labour camps and collective punishment (Canada); 3. Work with the international community to bring its criminal justice system into line with its obligations under ICCPR and other international human rights instruments (Australia); 4. Recognize the mandate of the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights, cooperate with him and grant him access (Netherlands); 5. Grant access, as a matter of priority, to the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in DPRK (Greece); 6. As a first step, allow the visit requested by the Special Rapporteur to take place as soon as possible and on the best conditions, and take his recommendations seriously taken into account (Switzerland); 7. Cooperate with the special procedures concretely by accepting the repeated requests for a country visit by the Special Rapporteurs on the situation of human rights situation and the right to food (Chile); 8. Cooperate more intensively with United Nations human rights mechanisms, in particular by responding positively to the repeated requests for visits by the Special Rapporteurs on the situation of human rights and the right to food (Spain); 9. Agree to the requests for a visit by the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights (Norway); 10. Fully cooperate with the Human Rights Council and accept the request of the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights to visit the country (Canada); 11. Improve its cooperation with United Nations human rights mechanisms, in particular the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights and other special procedures, and allow access (Germany); 12. Develop cooperation on the issues of human rights with international organizations and their mechanisms, in particular by engaging constructively with the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights and responding positively to offers of technical assistance by OHCHR (Lithuania); 13. Allow urgently the development of international operations of food distribution in the whole country; put an end to discrimination in the governmental food distribution, prioritizing children, pregnant women, persons with disabilities and senior citizens (Spain); 14. Establish a moratorium on executions with a view to abolishing the death penalty (Brazil); 15. Abolish death penalty or at least to establish a moratorium on executions (Chile); 16. End all public and extrajudicial executions and introduce a moratorium on the death penalty with a view to its abolition (Italy); 17. Adopt a moratorium on the application of death penalty to put an end to the practice of public executions and the imposition of the death penalty for religious or political crimes (Spain); 18. Taking note of reduction of number of crimes punishable by the death sentence, consider introducing a moratorium with a view to abolish the death penalty in the future (Lithuania); 19. Halt all public executions, and intensify efforts to ensure that no detainee is subject to torture or cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment (New Zealand); 20. Establish a moratorium on executions with a view to the rapid abolition of the death penalty, and in the immediate future, respect minimum international standards, including the right to a fair trial, the limitation of the death penalty to the most serious crimes, as well as the non application of the death penalty to minors, pregnant women and persons suffering from mental diseases (France); 21. Refrain from the practice of public execution used to intimidate the people, as reported by the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights, in contravention of its own penal code, and accept the recommendation of the Committee on Civil and Political Rights to work toward the abolishment of capital punishment (Israel); 22. Put an end to the practice of extrajudicial executions, public and secret (Chile); 23. Immediately end extrajudicial executions and the practice of collective punishment (Norway); 24. Put an end to kidnapping and enforced disappearance of persons, whatever their country of origin (Chile); 25. Set a concrete time frame and take concrete actions in order to resolve the abduction issue as soon as possible, including ensuring the immediate return of Japanese and other abductees (Japan); 26. Immediately cease public executions and the use of torture and cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment or punishment and ratify CAT (Canada); 27. Abolish the practice of torture, cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment, including the collective punishment of families, as reported by the Special Rapporteur, and amend national legislation to prohibit the torture and other ill-treatment of children, as recommended by the Committee on the Rights of the Child; (Israel); 28. Implement regulations to protect women from torture and abuse in detention facilities, and hold female criminal offenders separately from men, guarded by female guards (United States); 29. End collective punishment of families, especially against children (Slovenia); 30. Abolish military training for children (Slovenia); 31. End the practice of imposing punishment on returnees (Netherlands); 32. Create and adopt a law that specifically addresses trafficked persons in the country and abolish all practices of penalizing trafficked women and children for unlawfully exiting the country upon their deportation back to DPRK (Israel); 33. Take immediate action to cease the practice of forced labour, including in detention facilities, and take urgent measures to ensure that children are not forced to participate in mobilization projects (United States); 34. Take effective measures against the practice of forced labour, including child labour and join ILO (Italy); 35. Put an end to forced labour practices (Chile); 36. Take measures to ensure an independent judicial system and the individual’s right to a fair trial (Sweden); 37. Implement its obligations under article 14 of ICCPR to ensure that everyone without distinction is entitled to a fair and public hearing by a competent, independent and impartial tribunal established by law (Ireland); 38. Abstain from political interference in judicial proceedings (Sweden); 39. Establish an independent judiciary and guarantee access to legal counsel and judicial redress to all detainees (Austria); 40. Ensure an independent judiciary that operates without political interference by the State and uphold an internationally recognized notion of the rule of law by reviewing and amending the constitutional and legislative provisions that may compromise or diminish the independence and impartiality of the judiciary, as recommended by the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (Israel); 41. Release persons detained for reasons related to their opinions or peaceful political activities (Belgium); 42. Put an end to the practice of incarcerating all the members of the family of every opposition figure, release without delay political prisoners and members of their family as well as ensure freedom of opinion and expression (France); 43. Reform its criminal code as soon as possible in order to guarantee freedom of movement both within its territory as well as towards foreign countries without the need for prior permission in accordance with applicable international standards (France); 44. Allow freedom of movement of its citizens within and across the border and end the punishment of those expelled or returned from abroad, including refugees and asylum-seekers (Japan); 45. Review the legislation on religious groups and organizations so as to ensure its compliance with ICCPR (Italy); 46. Lift restrictions imposed on religious practices, cease persecution and rigid control over those professing their religious beliefs and ensure that its domestic legislation and practice is in full compliance with the requirements of article 18 of ICCPR (Poland); 47. With regard to ensuring the right to food to the entire population, including in jails and labour camps, cooperate in a constructive manner with the competent United Nations institutions and facilitate the work of NGOs present in the country by guaranteeing their access to the entire population (France); 48. Reduce controls on its population, including the closure of markets, suppression of criticism of Government policies, lack of alternative media and harsh penalties on those who access external information (New Zealand); 49. Increase technical cooperation on human rights issues including by granting access to the Special Rapporteur on the human rights situation (United Kingdom); 50. Demonstrate a genuine willingness to improve its human rights record by engaging more positively and openly with the international community, including the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights, and work constructively with the United Nations system to bring its human rights into line with international standards (Australia). 92. All conclusions and/or recommendations contained in the present report reflect the position of the submitting State(s) and /or the State under review. They should not be construed as endorsed by the Working Group as a whole. Annex Composition of the delegation The delegation of DPRK was headed by H.E. Mr. Ri Tcheul, Ambassador and Permanent Representative DPRK Mission in Geneva and composed of 12 members: • Mr. Kang Yun Sok, Director-General of the Department of Legislation, DPRK Supreme People’s Assembly • Mr. Kim Myong Chol, Section Chief of the Department of Legislation DPRK, Supreme People’s Assembly • Mr. Sim Hyong Il, Chief of Legal Bureau of DPRK Central Court • Mrs. Kim Sun Hwa, Official, Department of Legislation DPRK Supreme People’s Assembly • Mrs. Han Chae Sun, Bureau chief of the Research Institute Ministry of Public Health • Mr. Jang Il Hun, Section Chief, DPRK Ministry of Foreign Affairs • Mr. Kim Yong Ho, Senior official, DPRK Ministry of Foreign Affairs • Mr. Kye Chun Yong, Deputy Permanent Representative, DPRK Mission in Geneva • Mr. Ri Jang Gon, Counsellor, DPRK Mission in Geneva • Mr. Choe Myong Nam, Counselor, DPRK Mission in Geneva • Mr. Sok Jong Myong, Counselor, DPRK Mission in Geneva • Mr. Jon Yong Ryong, First Secretary, DPRK Mission in Geneva 