UNITED NATIONS A Distr.General Assembly General A/HRC/13/17 4 January 2010 Original:  ENGLISH  HUMAN RIGHTS COUNCIL Thirteenth session Agenda item 6 UNIVERSAL PERIODIC REVIEW REPORT OF THE WORKING GROUP ON THE UNIVERSAL PERIODIC REVIEW* Ethiopia * Previously issued under document symbol A/HRC/WG.6/6/L.16; minor revisions have been added under the authority of the secretariat of the Human Rights Council on the basis of editorial changes made by States through the ad referendum procedure.  The annex to the present report is circulated as received. GE.10-10147 CONTENTS Paragraphs Page Introduction...................................................................................................... 1 -4 3 I. SUMMARY OF THE PROCEEDINGS OF THE REVIEW PROCESS ... 5 -96 3 A. Presentation by the State under review.......................................... 5 -24 3 B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review....... 25 -96 6 II. CONCLUSIONS AND/OR RECOMMENDATIONS............................... 97 - 100 14 Annex Composition of the delegation......................................................................... 26 Introduction 1. The Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review, established in accordance with Human Rights Council resolution 5/1 of 18 June 2007, held its sixth session from 30 November to 11 December 2009.  The review of Ethiopia was held at the 16th meeting, on 9 December 2009.  The delegation of Ethiopia was headed by Ambassador Fisseha Yimer, Special Adviser to the Minister, Ministry of Foreign Affairs. At its 17th meeting, on 11 December 2009, the Working Group adopted the present report on Ethiopia. 2. On 7 September 2009, the Human Rights Council selected the following group of rapporteurs (troika) to facilitate the review of Ethiopia: Chile, Kyrgyzstan and Italy. 3. In accordance with paragraph 15 of  the annex to resolution 5/1, the following documents were issued for the review of Ethiopia: (a) A national report submitted in accordance with paragraph 15 (a) (A/HRC/WG.6/6/ETH/1);  (b) A compilation prepared by the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) in accordance with paragraph 15 (b) (A/HRC/WG.6/6/ETH/2); (c) A summary prepared by OHCHR in accordance with paragraph 15 (c) (A/HRC/WG.6/6/ETH/3).  4. A list of questions prepared in advance by Argentina, the Czech Republic, Germany, Latvia and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland was transmitted to Ethiopia through the troika. These questions are available on the extranet of the UPR. I. SUMMARY OF THE PROCEEDINGS OF THE REVIEW PROCESS A. Presentation by the State under review 5. At the 16th meeting, the Special Adviser to the Minister for Foreign Affairs introduced the national report and indicated that it was prepared in a transparent and participatory manner with the participation of all relevant actors and stakeholders. 6. The delegation stated that in 2009 Ethiopia’s State report on CEDAW was reviewed and a report submitted in accordance with the African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights. Also in 2009, reports were submitted in relation to ICCPR, ICESCR and CAT to the respective treaty bodies and are pending consideration. 7. Ethiopia indicated that the Federal Constitution provides that any law, customary practice or any decision of a state organ or public official which contravenes the Constitution shall be of no effect. The Federal Government and the Regional States have legislative, executive and judicial powers defined by the Federal Constitution. Ethiopia has two Federal Houses: the House of Peoples’ Representatives comprised of persons elected for a period of five years and the House of Federation composed of representatives of the nations, nationalities and peoples of Ethiopia. One third of the provisions of the Federal Constitution are dedicated to fundamental human and democratic rights. The Constitution guarantees the rights of nations, nationalities and peoples to develop and preserve their culture and history. 8. Ethiopia highlighted that the Federal Constitution guarantees every person’s inalienable right to life. While capital punishment is still permitted under the law and prisoners, the actual reality illustrates that capital punishment has been practically abolished. Only three death penalties have been carried out during the last 15 years. The Federal Constitution recently enacted criminal and criminal procedure codes prohibiting torture, inhumane and degrading treatment. The Federal Constitution also guarantees the rights of accused persons which include being brought before a court within 48 hours, to be presumed innocent until proven guilty and to appeal to a competent court challenging any judgment against them. Accused persons also have a right to a public trial, except where their case relates to issues such as privacy, public morals and national security.  9. The delegation indicated that persons of all religions are given equal opportunities for access to land to build places of worship. Christian and Muslim holidays are made public holidays by law, with the Government media agencies broadcasting the celebrations. Religious texts are circulated in increasing numbers and there is a strong tolerance among the various religions with people of different religions living in harmony.  10. The delegation highlighted that with the introduction of press and media laws, and capacity-building and professional ethics training for journalists, a number of print and electronic media, and radio and television broadcasting services, have emerged.  11. The delegation stated that the respect for the right to privacy has become prevalent with people demanding search warrants from police officers. Courts have ruled inadmissible evidence collected without a search warrant. Citizens have a constitutional right to freedom of peaceful assembly and demonstrations, with a proclamation being issued to establish procedures for peaceful demonstrations and public meetings. Freedom of association is also guaranteed by the Federal Constitution, as well as the right to vote, to be elected, to participate in elections and take part in the conduct of public affairs. Complaints relating to elections are directed to the Election Board with the option of appealing its decision to the Federal Court. 12. The delegation indicated that legal and policy measures were introduced to rectify the deep rooted political, economic and cultural bias against women. A number of laws – the Family Code, the Criminal Code and the Nationality law – have also been revised and amended. Equal rights for women, in marriage, divorce, custody of children, and rights to matrimonial properties are promoted.  13. With regard to the rights of the child, Ethiopia indicated that a National Plan of Action for Children has been implementing child-focused interventions in basic health-care, education and protection services for children orphaned by HIV/AIDS, in collaboration with non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and other civil society groups.  14. The delegation stated that ownership of land, as well as natural resources, are vested in the State and the peoples, and thus not for sale. Peasants and pastoralists have a right to free land. Both women and men have equal rights to use, administer and bequeath land to their heirs.  15. The delegation indicated that legislation has been introduced to effectively implement constitutional guarantees and lays the basis for protecting the rights of workers.  16. The delegation stated that with regard to education, Ethiopia has experienced increased primary school enrolments, including the promotion of universal and free primary education. Furthermore, a rapid expansion of establishing new universities is undertaken in an endeavour to also ensure an even distribution of higher education across the nation.   17. The delegation noted that the right to form and join trade unions is constitutionally guaranteed for factory and service workers, farm labourers, and other rural workers. The labour law provides the procedures for exercising trade union rights. 18. On health related matters, Ethiopia indicated that the Health Sector Extension Programme has been introduced in recognition of the failure of essential services to reach the people at the grass-roots level. The plan involves the accelerated training of 30,000 health workers in order to reach universal coverage in all rural kebeles, with 24,571 health workers already trained and deployed.  Though still high, Ethiopia has made encouraging progress in reducing child mortality. The maternal mortality ratio of Ethiopia has declined. In order to further improve this situation, the health sector has given priority to increasing the coverage of maternal health service.  19. The delegation stated that some parts of the country repeatedly encounter chronic drought. Hence the country, to a certain degree, is dependent on international food aid to meet the overall food required for its population. Although several programs associated with food production have been devised to make Ethiopia food self-sufficient, the country is still unable to prevent seasonal shortage of food in certain parts. 20. The delegation stated that Ethiopia is hosting refugees from neighbouring countries in 13 refugee centres, in cooperation with international organizations such as UNHCR and ICRC. In most of these centres, international organizations maintain offices so that refugees have ready access to them. In addition to basic needs including water, food and shelter, every refugee centre is equipped with a primary school. 21. The delegation stated that extensive training education on human rights for legislators and law enforcement officials have been conducted by the Government, the Ethiopian Human Rights Commission and the Institution of the Ombudsman at the Federal level.  In a similar undertaking, a nationwide human rights training program for law enforcement officials has been undertaken. Various government organs have also initiated and organized human rights awareness raising activities for their professionals. 22. The delegation stated that Civics and Ethical Education, which incorporate the ideals of human rights, has started at the primary, secondary and tertiary level throughout Ethiopia in public, private, secular or religious schools. Human rights courses are also incorporated in the curricula of military and police training schools, with emphasis placed on the role of the police and military officers in the protection of human rights in peace or during armed conflict.  23. The delegation stated that there are numerous human rights challenges Ethiopia is facing, mostly due to its economic situation, socio-cultural context, and the persistence of certain traditional practices, and other difficulties and constraints.  24. The delegation stressed that Ethiopia is committed to continuing its cooperation with the United Nations human rights organs and will consider extending further invitations for country visits by United Nations special rapporteurs. B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review 25. During the inter-active dialogue, statements were made by 53 delegations. A number of delegations thanked Ethiopia for its commitment to the universal periodic review process, noted that the national report was prepared with the contributions of civil society organisations, and commended Ethiopia for being a State party to most core international human right treaties and for submitting its reports to a number of treaty bodies. Recommendations made during the interactive dialogue are listed in Chapter II of the present report. 26. Algeria welcomed the adoption of the Plan for Accelerated and Sustained Development to End Poverty and asked whether an evaluation on its impact on the standard of living had been conducted. It appreciated the progress in the area of health care. Noting that malnutrition accounted for 54 per cent of child mortality, Algeria recognized Ethiopia’s important progress to ensuring food security and stated that water scarcity and drought continued to severely affect certain regions of the country. Policies for the realization of the right to education, in particular, basic education, were also noted.  27. Belgium highlighted Ethiopia’s difficulties to ensure food self-sufficiency. Belgium stated the reticence of authorities to ensuring access of the international community to the Ogaden region. United Nations and NGOs being unable to carry out their work properly undermines the distribution of food packages and medication. Belgium asked about programmes for becoming self-sufficient on food production, and if these were subject to an independent evaluation.  28. Turkey appreciated the establishment of the Ethiopian Human Rights Commission (EHRC) and the Mediator’s Office. It welcomed that primary and secondary basic education is free of charge. It congratulated Ethiopia for legislative amendments to reduce gender inequalities, and modifications in family laws that enable women to have equal rights in marriage and custody. It encouraged Ethiopia to continue efforts in the application of CEDAW and asked about the application of the National Action Plan aimed at the re-adaptation of persons with disabilities. 29. Belarus positively valued the efforts in overcoming poverty, hunger and destitution, and noted that the lack of food and medicine are key problems. Belarus expressed its support to Ethiopia’s requests to international organizations for development assistance. It commended Ethiopia for the measures to improve the situation of women, including the possibilities extended to participate in political life, and welcomed the adoption of a National Plan of Action for Children.  30. Egypt commended Ethiopia’s efforts on socio-economic rights, resulting in the increase of enrolment rates in primary education and for the comprehensive human rights education programme. It noted the number of instruments adopted to enable women to enjoy all rights in equal terms with men, such as the National Policy on Women, the National Action Plan on Gender Equality and the Women’s Development Package. It requested information on progress achieved so far.  31. The United Kingdom asked how consultations with civil society will continue in the follow-up to the review and how Ethiopia will ensure that the new Civil Society Organizations Law does not constrain independent human rights organizations. It commended Ethiopia’s priority given to the MDGs, including the progress made in free and universal primary education. It appreciated the continuing development of EHRC and urged Ethiopia to move quickly to appoint a new Chief Commissioner.  32. Djibouti commended Ethiopia for its cooperation with OHCHR in submitting reports to treaty bodies. It appreciated the improvement in women’s participation in political life. It noted the provisions of the new criminal code of 2005 criminalizing harmful traditional practices, and that the awareness raising campaigns against female genital mutilation had decreased the acceptance rates by the communities. Djibouti requested information on the system of data collection to evaluate progress and Ethiopia’s evaluation of the level of cooperation between federal and regional institutions and public organs. 33. Finland referred to concerns by the Special Rapporteur on human rights defenders over police brutality, torture, extrajudicial killings, arbitrary arrests and unfair trials. It noted reports of insufficient control of police powers to arrest and detain suspects by prosecutors or courts. It asked to what extent legal institutions safeguard citizens from maltreatment and about the organization of protection by the government at different levels of society. It also asked how the scope of action of human rights defenders is safeguarded in Ethiopia. 34. Canada welcomed Ethiopia’s commitment to consider extending invitations for country visits to United Nations special procedures and encouraged these visits. Canada reiterated that the 2009 Charities and Societies Proclamation is a source of serious concern. Canada noted that the full and unfettered participation of all political parties in the electoral process is critical to successful elections and Ethiopia’s ongoing stability and future prosperity. Canada commended the legislative reform undertaken to address female genital mutilation.  35. France asked Ethiopia about intentions to create a parliamentary inquiry commission to clarify the events in the aftermath of the 2005 elections, and on the establishment of an independent inquiry commission on alleged human rights violations in Ogaden in 2005 and in the context of the April 2007 offensive. It enquired about measures to ensure that laws relating to the press and the fight against terrorism do not lead to abusive restrictions, projected law reforms on civil society and measures taken in relation to FGM and domestic violence. France welcomed the recent signature of a code of conduct with opposition forces and the agreed deployment of a European observation mission of the May 2010 elections. 36. Austria noted that the CRC expressed concern about discrimination against girls, children with disabilities, children living in poverty, children affected by HIV/AIDS and refugee and ethnic minority children, and requested information on follow-up. It noted that the Committee on the Rights of the Child and the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women were concerned about high numbers of women and girls victims of sexual violence and abuse and about widespread impunity for perpetrators of such acts. Austria enquired about the Government’s plans to address these serious concerns. 37. Australia commended the efforts to increase primary school enrolments and develop health services. It noted indications of concerns relating to the treatment of ethnic minorities during internal conflict and the calls for independent investigations of these allegations, and asked whether Ethiopia intends to undertake such an investigation. It noted that the United Nations independent expert on minority issues stated that Ethiopia should ensure civil society groups are free from interference and harassment. It noted concerns about political detainees in Ethiopia, including the case of a detained political leader.  38. The Russian Federation, while noting the serious challenges faced, noted with satisfaction the progress achieved in providing political stability and national unity, strengthening democratic institutions, including the national human rights institutions, and developing education and health. 39. Germany expressed concerns at persisting gender disparity on many levels due to differences in access to control over resources between men and women, women’s limited access to education, and the still limited political representation and decision-making power. Germany asked about further steps envisaged to addressing this issue. 40. The Democratic Republic of the Congo welcomed efforts to inter alia reduce maternal and child mortality by improving access to medical care and to combat unemployment by more job-oriented teaching. It also welcomed the campaign against various prejudices concerning women, and measures to combat practices that keep women in the state of inferiority. It requested explanations about notions of “nations”, “nationalities” and “peoples” in Ethiopia. It also asked Ethiopia to comment on the results for development obtained mid-term regarding the MDGs.  41. Mexico noted difficulties Ethiopia faced and appreciated priority given to ensuring food security. It stressed efforts to prevent trafficking in persons and to prohibit torture in the new criminal code, to eradicate HIV/AIDS, malaria and tuberculosis, and to eliminate harmful traditional practices as female genital mutilations and child marriages. Mexico requested information on international technical assistance required to reduce poverty. 42. The United States was concerned that the recent law classifies NGOs receiving more than ten per cent of their budget from foreign sources as “foreign charities” and prevents them from working on human rights. The United States noted that most senior government institutions are overwhelmingly represented by one ethnicity. It was concerned that Ethiopia has not allowed ICRC to operate in the Ogaden since 2008 and that other organisations have found access limited. The United States welcomed the pre-departure orientation to migrant workers, while expressing concern over the limited capacity to prosecute trafficking crimes.  43. The Czech Republic asked how the implementation of obligations from human rights treaties is ensured in national legislation, including the principle of non-discrimination and the right to privacy.   44. The Netherlands noted several outstanding requests for visits of special procedures mandate-holders. It expressed concerns at the restrictive nature and possible negative consequences for the work of NGOs of the Proclamation for the Registration and Regulation of Charities and Societies. It also noted that the Anti-Terrorism Proclamation, particularly the broad definition of terrorism, placing the burden of proof on criminal suspects and high sentences, was a cause of concern.  45. Somalia welcomed the form of federalism of Ethiopia which allows minority groups and the various ethnic groups to exercise their cultural, social and economic rights. It highlighted remarkable achievements in the implementation of social and economic rights through the expansion of health, education and other services. Somalia welcomed the delivery of comprehensive human rights education programmes.  46. Nigeria highlighted the efforts made to broaden the space for freedom of expression by issuing licenses to a number of press outlets. It applauded efforts for establishing the comprehensive human rights education programmes delivered through the federal and state civic and ethical education programmes. 47. Spain noted its interest for Ethiopia’s policies and strategies, particularly regarding the rights of women and combating gender violence. Spain noted efforts to improve the protection of the rights of women, in particular the National Policy on Women, the National Action Plan on Gender Equality and the Women’s Development Package. 48. Brazil highlighted the free anti-retroviral programme to combat HIV/AIDS and the awareness campaign against female genital mutilation. It welcomed Ethiopia’s continuous hosting of large numbers of refugees. Brazil asked how the National Policy on Women addresses domestic and sexual violence and about specific institutions to investigate cases of gender violence and ensure redress. It expressed concern about women’s limited access to education and encouraged Ethiopia to continue efforts to reduce the maternal mortality ratio. Brazil expressed concern for the deteriorating food security situation in some regions of Ethiopia and encouraged the international community to increase humanitarian resources, to eliminate trade-distorting subsidies and to enhance technical cooperation. 49. Ethiopia indicated that detailed responses to all recommendations and questions will be addressed in a written submission to the Human Rights Council before the thirteenth session.  50. Ethiopia stated that the recently enacted civil society law is the only legislation where stakeholders were consulted at the level of the Prime Minister. The law is in force and Ethiopia considers it serves the national interest. The delegation did not consider the need to repeal the law. The law needs an opportunity to operate before a review is considered. The registration of existing organisations and new organisations is ongoing.   51. On the anti-terrorism legislation, Ethiopia had looked at corresponding legislation in other countries. It did not consider that a review of this legislation is warranted at this time as it is working well. The delegation did not consider that the legislation contravenes the freedom of expression and freedom of the media. In enacting it, efforts were made to ensure that the obligations under international human rights law are complied with. There is law protecting rights and in the case of infractions, victims may go to court to seek appropriate relief.   52. Ethiopia is not against visits of special rapporteurs, and has extended invitations in the past. However, due consideration must be given to the preparations required for such visits. In principle, Ethiopia is supportive of visits by special rapporteurs and will consider the requests for such visits as and when received. 53. Ethiopia indicated that humanitarian assistance throughout the country, access to regions for food distribution and policies and programmes for food production are all in place but their implementation is still in progress. The delegation stressed that it will not accept that any region in Ethiopia was denied access to food. 54. As regards Ethiopia’s human rights implementation, the delegation indicated that it did not know any country that will claim that its human rights implementation is perfect. The delegation stated that Ethiopia will try its best to live up to its obligations.  55. Ethiopia stated that a national action plan for persons with disabilities is being developed.  56. The delegation highlighted that a Ministry for Women’s Affairs exists at cabinet level. It acknowledged that trafficking of women is a problem and is tackled under the penal law, criminal code and other legislation. 57. The delegation indicated that 65 parties adhere to the code of conduct for political parties, which is currently under consideration by Parliament to become law. The delegation expected the code to meet wide acceptance and contribute to a smooth election in May 2010.   58. With regard to the relationship between the Federal Government and the Regional Governments, the delegation emphasised that this cooperation is working well.  59. On the issue and scope of action on human rights defenders, the delegation noted that as long as human rights defenders operate within the law, there should be no problem. 60. As regards Ogaden, the delegation noted that Ethiopia has carried out its own investigation, while the outcome thereof may not be to the liking of those who desired a different result. The delegation stated that no sovereign state has an obligation to establish an international commission of enquiry. 61. Ethiopia agreed with the recommendation to cooperate with the United Nations and NGOs. The delegation noted that it does not consider there is harassment of civil society organisations in Ethiopia. 62. The delegation indicated that Ethiopia is proud that it is a party to the major human rights instruments. In noting that Ethiopia is not party to any of the Optional Protocols, the delegation considered this to be a different matter to be studied on its merits.  63. Latvia noted that several requests by special procedures mandate holders to visit Ethiopia have not been accepted yet, despite still pending requests by special procedures mandate holders to visit.  64. Slovenia commended Ethiopia for the National Plan of Action for Children. It highlighted that the Government campaign significantly reduced the acceptance rate of female genital mutilation  by the community, which remains the most common form of violence against women and girls in Ethiopia. It asked about measures to reinforce efforts in this regard. Slovenia mentioned that a number of outstanding requests for visits of several special procedures mandate-holders, including the special rapporteurs on extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions, and on the right to food and the working group on arbitrary detention. 65. The Holy See noted that Ethiopia’s multiethnic character was not yet reflected in the government composition. It asked about the measures intended to achieve a more equitable power-sharing. It noted that maternal and child mortality, despite of a recent decline, remains high. The Holy See added that despite laws adopted by the Government, women are still suffering from all kinds of discrimination, that female genital mutilation is widespread, women have limited access to education, and that their right of inheritance is problematic.  66. Argentina appreciated the delegation’s readiness to explain the situation in Ethiopia and in particular on what has been done for the most vulnerable sectors of the population. It also appreciated Ethiopia’s readiness to provide primary education free of charge.  67. Sweden thanked the delegation for having addressed concerns in relation to the new civil society organisations law, which it noted restricts the ability of human rights organizations and defenders to operate. It expressed concerns on the Anti-Terror Proclamation, as it provides for inter alia a broad definition of terrorism. Sweden noted reports of persons held in custody for up to four months before being brought to court. It hoped efforts to improve respect for human rights will extend to political prisoners, the continued use of the death penalty, and the situation in the Somali region.  68. Nicaragua highlighted the progress made to guarantee most basic rights of its populations such as health, education and housing. It noted that extreme poverty is an obstacle. Nicaragua commended Ethiopia’s holistic vision and noted that its national report reflects important challenges that the State is willing to face in the area of human rights, in particular in the areas of public health, education and culture, environment and State administration.  69. Azerbaijan noted with interest the information on the provision of freedom of thought, conscience and religion as well as an environment of religious tolerance. Azerbaijan noted concerns relating to malnutrition, infections, low levels of access to reproductive health and emergency obstetric services, maternal mortality and morbidity rate, and insufficient resources to address them. It commended the establishment of the Ministry of Women’s Affairs.  70. China welcomed the establishment of the National Human Rights Commission, the National Electoral Board and the Ministry of Women’s Affairs. China mentioned the improved enrolment rate for general education and the rapid development of higher education, and noted that essential primary health care was provided at household level to combat HIV/AIDS. China requested information on new measures for the protection and promotion of the rights of women and on how to combat harmful traditional practices.  71. Cameroon noted with interest the specific measures and provisions undertaken such as on HIV/AIDS, education, promotion and protection of women’s and children’s rights, and managing refugees. It encouraged Ethiopia to intensify measures for the promotion and protection of economic, social and cultural rights, in particular the rights of the child, women, minorities and vulnerable populations, and in combating all forms of discrimination.  72. India appreciated the adoption of the National Plan of Action for Children and the National Action Plan on Gender Equality, the institution of a free anti-retroviral programme, and the launching of the Health Sector Extension Programme. It also noted Ethiopia’s long-lasting record as a host country for refugees from neighbouring countries and urged it to continue cooperation with international mechanisms. India encouraged the international community to extend capacity building and technical assistance to Ethiopia.  73. The Congo noted the legislative measures taken to overcome abuses and violence, such as female genital mutilation, domestic violence, early marriages and child abductions, which demonstrated Ethiopia’s commitment to promote and protect human rights. It appreciated that the application of the death penalty is declining, and called on the international community to provide technical assistance in the areas of maternal and child health and education, to assist Ethiopia with the consequences of flood and drought which regularly affect the country.  74. Saudi Arabia noted that all of the international agreements recognized by Ethiopia are part of its legislation. It noted that the National Commission for Human Rights and the Commission deal with complaints about injustices and attempt to settle disputes.   75. Pakistan noted legislative reforms in the family and criminal laws which ensured complementarity between the international and national norms. It appreciated the steps taken for the protection of women and the promotion of the social, economic and cultural rights of minorities. It also appreciated the remarkable increase in enrolment rates together with strong emphasis on the human rights education, at different levels.  76. Ireland noted concerns in relation to allegations of human rights abuses in the Somali region and enquired whether Ethiopia was open to an independent international monitoring visit to the region to investigate these allegations and issues of humanitarian access, and visits of any special procedure mandate-holder. It requested information on measures to promote the role of human rights defenders. Ireland expressed concerns at the effects of the Charities and Societies Proclamation 2009, which could reduce the level of NGO activities in the area of human rights. It enquired about Ethiopia’s intention to reviewing this legislation. 77. Angola appreciated the considerably increased school attendance rate and the rapid development of higher education. It requested information on the policies and strategies to achieve these results.  Angola noted a number of remaining difficulties and in the country such as the harmful traditional practices such as female genital mutilation, early marriages and abductions linked to forced marriages. It asked about the steps taken by the Government to overcome these scourges.  78. Norway appreciated Ethiopia’s cooperation with the United Nations human rights system, including the recent submission of overdue treaty body reports. It remained concerned about working conditions and the situation of human rights defenders, including as a result of the Proclamation for the registration and Regulation of Charities and Societies. It was further concerned about reports alleging restrictions on opposition party gatherings and meetings.  79. The Libyan Arab Jamahiriya noted the adoption of the National Action Plan for Children and the integration of civic education and ethics as part of Ethiopia’s new policy in the field of education and training. It referred to the importance of policies and programmes on the right to education, which improved the quality of and access to education of girls and boys, especially in primary education. 80. South Africa commended Ethiopia on its recognition of the justiciability of economic, social and cultural rights. It asked about measures to achieve food security through increased production, to address the trafficking of children, to reduce disparities in employment rates between men and women, and to promote gender equality.  81. Yemen highly valued the efforts in health sectors as a result of a successful launching of a health-wide sector modernization plan, which has enabled the provision of primary health care services. 82. Morocco acknowledged the reform of the rights of the family resulting in certain traditional practices being ended and welcomed the promoting of tolerance, coexistence and respect for cultural and religious diversity. It requested information on measures to overcome poverty, particularly in rural areas. Morocco acknowledged the comprehensive human rights education programmes implemented through federal programmes of civic education and ethics in all schools.  83. Poland highlighted the adoption of a Mass Media and Freedom of Information Proclamation in 2008, while indicating that human rights defenders remain exposed to repression and persecution and deprived of the right to freedom of expression. It asked about steps in order to release detained human rights defenders and to eradicate harassment of members of political opposition parties, journalists and human rights defenders.  84. Cuba highlighted Ethiopia’s progress in health, education, culture and the rights of persons with disabilities, children and women. It welcomed measures to broaden coverage and access to health services. In this context, it urged the international community to redouble cooperation and financial assistance. Cuba welcomed the increased quality of education and school attendance rates. It highlighted that primary and second education is free of charge and the affirmative measures regarding access to education for, inter alia, girls and persons with disabilities.  85. Switzerland expressed concern at persisting ethnic conflicts and encouraged Ethiopia to double its efforts of political integration. Recognizing the progress made, Switzerland remained concerned that too many women and children are still victims of exploitation and sexual abuse and that many acts remain unpunished. It stressed the need for free and independent media and noted that the 2009 Proclamation for the Registration and Regulation of Charities and Societies raised concerns.  86. Slovakia commended the provisions criminalising harmful traditional practices and most forms of human trafficking. It expressed concern at the continued, while limited, application of the death penalty. Slovakia noted that social stereotypes discriminating against women persisted.  87. Ghana commended Ethiopia for measures to increase school enrolment rates, to expand higher education, to deliver essential primary healthcare services at household-level, and to expand infrastructure. It referred to challenges and constraints, including widespread poverty, resource constraints, traditional practices and the prevalence of deadly diseases, and issues raised by some treaty bodies. 88. Côte d’Ivoire appreciated the temporary special measures taken in relation to discrimination of women. It welcomed that 30 per cent of university places are reserved for female students and hoped that these efforts would be continued. It also welcomed the friendly relations Ethiopia entertained with neighbours despite difficulties faced in recent years, and noted that Ethiopia received refugees from these countries for a long time.  89. The United Arab Emirates commended Ethiopia’s achievements in the field of education, including the increased enrolment rate of children in primary education resulting in decreased illiteracy among children at school age. The United Arab Emirates requested information on education programmes referred to in the national report and on their impact.  90. Bangladesh noted that Ethiopia faces widespread poverty, food shortage, malaria and HIV/AIDS, and stated that its level of development and other constraints should not be ignored. Bangladesh acknowledged Ethiopia’s progress in a number of areas and underlined the need for international support in other areas. 91. The Sudan noted that Ethiopia was rich with tradition, that its constitution banned torture and contained provisions on the equality before courts and tribunals guaranteeing fair trial. It commended Ethiopia for the steps taken to tackle unemployment and appreciated its decision to make primary, general secondary education and related training free of charge.   92. Kyrgyzstan noted that human rights are enshrined in the constitution and other legislative documents and the adoption of a national plan of action for the rehabilitation of persons with disabilities. Kyrgyzstan wished to receive more information regarding: mother and child health, gender equality, improved education, actions to  speeding-up the country-wide primary healthcare, cooperating with human rights bodies.  93. In response to statements made, Ethiopia appreciated and shared the concerns raised as regards women and children, and indicated that a national committee has been established to address harmful and traditional practices against women. Also, advocacy in relation to the rights of women are being carried out through ethical and civic education, through the mass media and other forums.  94. Ethiopia indicated that a department dealing with children’s affairs exists within the Ministry of Women’s affairs and there is a policy of training for law enforcement officials on child trafficking crimes. The delegation stated that this reflects that Ethiopia takes the trafficking of women and children very seriously. 95. The delegation highlighted that the National Human Rights Commission is finalising its accreditation process in accordance with the Paris Principles. 96. Ethiopia referred to the question that a particular ethnic group dominates the Government, and stressed that it took exception to that characterisation. The delegation indicated that given the composition of the branches of Government, i.e. the legislature, the executive, the judiciary, the armed forces and the police, the delegation finds the characterisation given objectionable.  II. CONCLUSIONS AND/OR RECOMMENDATIONS 97. 	The following recommendations listed below enjoy the support of Ethiopia:  1. 	Consider ratifying the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families (Democratic Republic of the Congo); 2. 	Consider implementing recommendations of relevant treaty bodies in accordance with their national priorities (Pakistan); 3. 	Formulate a national plan of action on human rights and strengthen the Ethiopian Human Rights Commission (EHRC), for example, by assisting in opening regional offices and providing access to all detention centres (Canada); 4. 	Undertake efforts to ensure that EHRC complies with relevant international standards (India); 5. 	Strengthen the functions of EHRC and the Ombudsman to bring them into line with the Paris Principles (Ghana); 6. 	Continue to strengthen the institutional framework so that the State is able to respond adequately and efficiently to future challenges in areas of public health, education, culture, environment and State administration (Nicaragua);  7. 	Intensify efforts in the areas of human rights education and capacity-building and organize training seminars on human rights for those working in relevant institutions and bodies (Egypt); 8. 	Step up the awareness-raising campaigns concerning human rights by translating international instruments concerning human rights into the various national languages (Democratic Republic of the Congo); 9. 	Strengthen instruments to protect human rights which could positively improve social, economic and cultural rights (Angola); 10. 	Continue towards ensuring that adequate instruments are put in place, enabling the involvement of Ethiopian citizens in the promotion and protection of human rights (Switzerland);  11. 	Undertake specific measures to ensure implementation of international treaties and domestic legislation designed to protect the rights of citizens (Finland);  12. 	Continue to work for strengthening its human rights infrastructure in cooperation with relevant United Nations human rights organs (Pakistan); 13. 	Strengthen cooperation with the international community and the United Nations human rights bodies in order to consolidate and promote human rights in the country (Angola); 14. 	Continue efforts, with the support of the international community, to ensure timely reporting to treaty bodies (Russian Federation); 15. 	Cooperate fully with the special procedures and respond positively to the outstanding requests for visits by mandate-holders (Netherlands); 16. 	Consider receiving the Special Rapporteurs of the Human Rights Council in Ethiopia (Norway); 17. 	Consider responding affirmatively to the visits requested by human rights mandate-holders, within the context of its cooperation with OHCHR (Brazil); 18. 	Address all urgent appeals sent by the United Nations special procedures mandate-holders (Ireland);  19. 	Make combating discrimination against vulnerable girls a national priority and adopt a comprehensive strategy to eliminate discrimination on any grounds against all vulnerable groups, as recommended by the Committee on the Rights of the Child (Azerbaijan); 20. 	Increase the efforts to improve the social status of women in society and enhance political and social rights (Belarus);  21. 	Guarantee fully the rights of women by effectively applying the family code, in particular of provisions relating to the minimum marital age, by harmonizing the respective existing regional legislation, by adopting a specific law to eradicate violence against women and by prosecuting and sanctioning those responsible for such acts (France); 22. 	Ensure access of women to education and control of resources with a view to promptly eliminating inequality between men and women (Mexico);  23. 	Further implement laws to effectively guarantee equality between men and women (Holy See); 24. 	Address the gender disparity as well as women’s limited access to education, their limited political representation and limited participation in decision-making (Azerbaijan); 25. 	Intensify its efforts of awareness-raising and education with regard to the respect of rights of women, in particular in areas where discriminatory practices prevail (Congo); 26. 	Intensify its efforts to counter gender discrimination (Slovakia); 27. 	Continue efforts aimed at combating female genital mutilation,  inter alia through the implementation of programmes sensitizing the population about its harmful effects (Egypt); 28. 	Continue building on ongoing efforts by fostering open discussions in communities still engaging in female genital mutilation practice (Canada);  29. 	Undertake an awareness-raising campaign against sexual violence (Austria); 30. 	Implement specific legislation to combat violence, in particular sexual violence against women and children (Austria);2 31. 	Provide, together with NGOs, safe places and assistance to victims of sexual violence (Austria); 32. 	Continue to take measures to eradicate all forms of violence against women including female genital mutilation, ensure the effective implementation of legal instruments in this connection, and allocate more resources to the Ministry for Women Affairs, the police and the judiciary and broaden awareness-raising campaigns in this respect (Spain); 33. 	Make all efforts to take the necessary measures to ensure that there is an effective prohibition of female genital mutilation(Argentina); 34. 	Continue efforts to overcome abductions and domestic violence involving women and children (Kyrgyzstan); 35. 	Take all necessary measures to prevent trafficking in persons, especially children, including the incorporation of international standards into national legislation, training of personnel involved in the fight against human trafficking, criminal prosecution of traffickers and the protection of victims of trafficking (Belarus);  36. 	Take necessary measures to ensure that women, girls and boys are prevented from being trafficked, sexually exploited or sold for prostitution (Argentina); 37. 	Step up efforts to prevent children from being engaged in trafficking, sexual exploitation and prostitution (Ghana); 38. 	Apply effective strategies and measures to reduce inconsistencies between laws and practice, including with regard to access to land for women, the gender gap in employment and trafficking in women (Norway); 39. 	Strengthen efforts to combat early and forced marriages (Angola); 40. 	Adopt specific measures to deal with the causes of the increasing problem of street children and to prevent and to punish sexual exploitation of children (France); 41. 	Implement fully the following recommendations of the Committee on the Rights of the Child: (a) ensure adequate resources to investigate cases of sexual abuse and exploitation and prosecute and impose adequate sentences for such crimes, (b) make combating discrimination against vulnerable girls a national priority and adopt a comprehensive strategy to eliminate discrimination on any grounds against all vulnerable groups, (c) enhance the security in refugee camps and take all necessary measures to protect girls against sexual exploitation, establish accessible complaints mechanisms, investigate cases of abuse fully and prosecute the perpetrators (Slovenia); 42. 	Strengthen measures to prevent recruitment of children in the armed forces (Azerbaijan);   43. 	Take measures to achieve timely registration of all births and create an adequate and credible birth registration system (Poland);  44. 	Investigate cases of sexual abuse and exploitation and prosecute and impose adequate sentences for such crimes (Holy See); 45. 	Effectively investigate and prosecute all cases of violence against women and children (Austria); 46. 	Provide adequate resources for the effective prosecution of cases of sexual violence (Austria); 47. 	Continue its efforts so that all forms of sexual violence against women and children are prosecuted and sanctioned and that victims obtain immediate reparation and protection (Switzerland);  48. 	Better educate security and law enforcement authorities at all levels about the basic rights of the citizens and enhance citizens’ possibilities to make complaints about mistreatment by the authorities (Finland);  49. 	Improve the investigative capacity of police and enhance judicial action on  trafficking to allow for more prosecutions of trafficking offenders, particularly perpetrators of internal child trafficking (United States); 50. 	Continue its efforts in the direction of providing for freedom of thought, conscience and religion as well as an environment of religious tolerance existing in Ethiopia (Azerbaijan);  51. 	Guarantee that all national and international NGOs operating in Ethiopia can do so freely and without fear of harassment, intimidation or arbitrary arrest (Netherlands);  52. 	Further engage constructively with civil society in its human rights activities in the country (Brazil); 53. 	Take all necessary measures to ensure full respect for the rights of association and assembly, including with regard to the ability of NGOs to function, which would be in line with Ethiopia’s Constitution and its international obligations (Sweden); 54. 	Ensure that the freedom of association is guaranteed in accordance with the provisions of article 22 of International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR) (Ireland); 55. 	Ensure that the procedures governing registration of civil society organizations are in conformity with international human rights standards, transparent, non.discriminatory, expeditious and inexpensive, and allow for the possibility to appeal (Norway); 56. 	Put in place measures to support the work of human rights defenders (Ireland); 57. 	Take action to ensure the safety and freedom of action of human rights defenders (Finland); 58. 	Promptly respond to complaints of harassment, intimidation or arbitrary arrests of human rights defenders, and take adequate measures for their safety (Norway); 59. 	Guarantee genuine freedom of expression to all political leaders and the media, in light of the next elections (France); 60. 	Adopt all necessary measures to provide for free and independent media which reflect a plurality of opinions, including those of minority groups and political opposition parties (Germany); 61. 	Fully and effectively implement the Freedom of Mass Media and Access to Information Proclamation (Norway); 62. 	Take steps to ensure civil and political rights are upheld, including freedom of expression and freedom from arbitrary arrest and detention (Australia); 63. 	Ensure that no one is detained for political reasons (Netherlands);  64. 	Take concrete steps to ensure free and fair elections in 2010, including through full implementation of the electoral Code of Conduct (United Kingdom);  65. 	Strictly implement the principles of the electoral Code of Conduct in the coming election (Norway); 66. 	Ensure that appropriate mechanisms for addressing grievances are put in place well ahead of the upcoming elections (Canada); 67. 	Continue the efforts to tackle unemployment in urban areas (Sudan);  68. 	Take measures deemed appropriate to guarantee the right of children to food, and to this end, request the assistance of institutions, programmes and international organisms competent on this issue (Algeria); 69. 	Give priority to programmes for upgrading land and water resources to reduce the long-term vulnerability caused by drought and allowing the population to satisfy its needs in water and food; and, in this regard, request the assistance of competent United Nations agencies and programmes (Algeria);  70. 	Request necessary technical assistance to build its capacity to deal with the issues and challenges faced in the fields of education, infrastructure, health, housing, agriculture, and ensuring food security (Pakistan);  71. 	Strengthen measures aimed at poverty eradication and improvement of access to safe drinking water, as well as social services (South Africa); 72. 	Develop a constructive partnership with the United Nations and NGOs working on food and medical assistance, and guarantee safe access to the country, including in areas where violent actions against federal authorities take place; this partnership should constitute one of the cornerstones of the new agriculture and land-use policies in Ethiopia (Belgium); 73. 	Achieve food security through, among others, securing adequate food assistance, increasing food production, adopting better agricultural technology and improving the food distribution system (Bangladesh); 74. 	Realize effectively the plans to overcome poverty and achieve sustainable development (Russian Federation); 75. 	Continue to fight poverty with the support and cooperation of the international community (Bangladesh); 76. 	Implement further measures, with regard to maternal mortality and child mortality, to save mother and child (Holy See); 77. 	Undertake further measures to consolidate the national health system in order to cut down on the spread of serious diseases (Kyrgyzstan); 78. 	Continue the efforts to provide the needed health services coverage as well as intensify efforts for the prevention and control of HIV/AIDS (Yemen); 79. 	Continue the positive efforts to improve access to health for all its citizens, including through cooperation and strengthened international financial assistance (Cuba); 80. 	Fight malaria and HIV/AIDS with the support of the international community (Bangladesh); 81. 	Seek to strengthen achievements in realizing the right to education, in particular with respect to free primary education and its obligation towards girls and boys (Algeria);  82. 	Strengthen efforts to improve the literacy rate of girls and women (Brazil); 83. 	Continue to take the necessary measures to ensure free and mandatory primary education and increase public expenditure in the area of education (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya); 84. 	Continue to advance and gradually improve the quality of education provided, as part of the wide programme adopted by Ethiopia to this end (Cuba); 85. 	Continue to facilitate education for all with due regard to girls’ education and non.discriminatory access and ensuring its quality (Bangladesh); 86. 	Continue the efforts to make primary and general secondary education and related training free of charge, with the help of the international community (Sudan);  87. 	Continue to promote the development of the education system (Kyrgyzstan); 88. 	Continue its efforts to protect internally displaced persons (Congo);  89. 	Consider developing a policy aimed at assisting and protecting internally displaced persons and refugees (South Africa); 90. 	Request necessary technical and financial assistance from the international community, in particular United Nations organs and programmes, to continue to take care of refugees and internally displaced persons (Côte d’Ivoire); 91. 	Take further measures to ensure that any efforts to counter terrorism are carried out in full compliance with its human rights obligations, including respect for due process and freedom of expression and assembly (Sweden);  92. 	Formulate more precisely, in collaboration with international organizations, its needs in terms of technical assistance in identified priority areas (Djibouti); 93. 	Continue seeking official development assistance as well as technical assistance from development partners with a view to finding solutions to the identified challenges hindering the enjoyment of human rights (Nigeria); 94. 	Continue cooperation with regional and international human rights mechanisms, in particular in the areas of technical cooperation and training (Saudi Arabia); 95. 	Request the necessary assistance from the international community to allow it to strengthen its capacities and to assist it in overcoming the difficulties and constraints it faces in the area of human rights (Morocco);  96. 	Request technical and financial assistance from the international community, in particular United Nations organs and programmes, with a view to putting into practice national policies to follow-up on recommendations formulated by the Human Rights Council in the context of the Universal Periodic Review (Côte d’Ivoire);  97. 	Seek cooperation of OHCHR as well as NGOs in the follow-up to the universal periodic review (Austria); 98. 	Establish an effective and inclusive process to follow-up on recommendations emerging from the universal periodic review (Norway); 98. The following recommendations will be examined by Ethiopia, which will provide responses in due time. The response of Ethiopia to these recommendations will be included in the outcome report to be adopted by the Human Rights Council at its thirteenth session:  1. 	Consider ratifying the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD)(Democratic Republic of the Congo); ratify the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD), and sign and ratify the Optional Protocol to CPRD (Spain); 2. 	Sign and ratify the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance (CED) (Spain); consider signing and/or ratifying the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance (CED) (Argentina); 3. 	Sign and ratify the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (Spain); 4. 	Sign and ratify the Optional Protocol to ICCPR (Spain); become party to the Optional Protocol to ICCPR (Canada) ; 5. 	Sign and ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (Spain, United Kingdom); accede to the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, and establish a national preventive mechanism accordingly (Czech Republic);  6. 	Sign and ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (Austria, Spain); become party to the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (Canada); 7. 	Sign the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC) on the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography (Spain); accede to the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC) on the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography (France); ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC) on the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography (Austria, Spain, Switzerland); become party to the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC) on the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography (Canada); 8. 	Sign become party to the Optional Protocol to CRC on the involvement of children in armed conflict (Spain); and ratify become party to the Optional Protocol to CRC on the involvement of children in armed conflict (Austria, Spain, Switzerland); become party to the Optional Protocol to CRC on the involvement of children in armed conflict (Canada); 9. 	Ensure effective birth registration of all children, raise the age of criminal responsibility in compliance with CRC and adopt specific measures to strengthen protection of human rights of children from vulnerable groups, such as children in detention, internally displaced children and children of refugees  (Czech Republic); 10. 	Undertake effective disciplinary and criminal procedures against members of the security forces involved in cases of sexual violence (Austria); 11. 	Strengthen efforts made to address the causes of ethnic conflicts on its territory and take necessary measures to prevent and sanction the forced recruitment of minors under the age of 18 (Mexico); 12. 	Adopt appropriate measures to disseminate widely and ensure full observance of the Declaration on Human Rights Defenders (Norway). 99. 	The following recommendations did not enjoy the support of Ethiopia:  1. 	Sign the Second Optional Protocol to ICCPR, aiming at the abolition of the death penalty (Spain); Sign and ratify the Second Optional Protocol to ICCPR, aiming at the abolition of the death penalty (Slovakia, Spain, Switzerland); become party to the Second Optional Protocol to ICCPR, aiming at the abolition of the death penalty (Canada); 2. 	Consider signing and/or ratifying the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court (Argentina); ratify the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court (Switzerland); 3. 	Further its commitment to human rights by becoming a party to the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court (Canada); 4. 	Ratify the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court, including  accession to the Agreement on the Privileges and Immunities of the International Criminal Court(Slovakia); 5. 	Open regional offices of the EHRC, starting with an office in Jijiga (United Kingdom); 6. 	Issue an open-ended and standing invitation to all special procedures; and more specifically respond positively to the requests for visits by the Special Rapporteurs on the promotion and protection of the right to freedom of opinion and expression and on the right to education, the Working Group on Arbitrary Detention, and the Special Rapporteurs on torture and on extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions (Spain); 7. 	Consider extending a standing invitation to all special procedures of the Human Rights Council (Latvia); 8. 	Issue a standing invitation for all special procedures and respond positively to all outstanding invitations (Slovenia); 9. 	Extend a standing invitation to all United Nations special procedures mandate-holders (Ireland); 10. 	Issue a standing invitation to all United Nations special procedures and respond favourably to all outstanding requests (Canada); 11. 	Issue a standing invitation to the special procedures of the Human Rights Council, and in particular accept a visit by the Special Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of the right to freedom of opinion and expression, which has already been requested twice (Poland);  12. 	Agree to the visit of the Special Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of the right to freedom of opinion and expression (Australia); 13. 	Allow for greater humanitarian access to the Ogaden so that organizations such as the International Committee of the Red Cross and United Nations relief agencies can provide assistance to victims of conflict (United States); 14. 	Give favourable consideration to prohibit the death penalty and corporal punishment in the Constitution and Ethiopian legislation in the area of the right to life (Mexico);  15. 	Abolish the death penalty (Spain); 16. 	Amend the related legislation to establish an immediate moratorium on the death penalty with a view to abolishing capital punishment generally in line with the  General Assembly resolutions 62/149 and 63/168 as well as ICCPR-OP 2 (Slovakia); 17. 	Commute the pending death sentences to imprisonment terms (Slovakia); 18. 	Undertake credible and independent investigations of alleged human rights violations in the Somali Region (United Kingdom); 19. 	Authorise the launching of an independent international inquiry on the allegations on the violations of human rights in the Somali region since 2007, and bring those responsible to justice (Switzerland);  20. 	Take effective measures, in line with the Committee on the Rights of the Child, to protect all children from torture, cruel and degrading treatment, particularly from members of the military (Germany); 21. 	Strengthen the human rights education and training of military forces and police, prison and judicial staff, and ensure their accountability for any violations of human rights, in particular for violence or sexual violence against women, children and persons of minority sexual orientation or gender identity (Czech Republic);  22. 	Decriminalize consensual same-sex activity between adults (Czech Republic); 23. 	Amend the provisions of the 2009 Charities and Societies Proclamation inconsistent with international human rights standards, including with respect to freedom of expression, association and assembly (Canada);  24. 	Allow exceptions to the Charities and Societies Proclamation to better enable NGOs, including those working on human rights, to receive funding and to operate effectively (United Kingdom); 25. 	Repeal the Proclamation for Registration of Charities and Societies and promote the development of an independent, transparent, and effective civil society and human rights community (United States); 26. 	Amend the Proclamation for the Registration and Regulation of Charities and Societies so as to bring it into conformity with international human rights standards (Netherlands); 27. 	Avoid requiring re-registration of civil society organizations (Norway); 28. 	Release imprisoned opposition party members and allow their full participation in the 2010 elections (Canada); 29. 	Encourage the development of integrationist multiracial organizations, including political parties, in line with ICERD and in accordance with a previous recommendation of the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination (Germany); 30. 	Conduct a review to examine the ethnic balance in government and develop diversification strategies to comply with the tenets set forth in its ethnic federalism policies (United States); 31. 	Consider ways to depoliticize ethnicity and promote policies of inclusion (Brazil); 32. 	Amend the Anti-Terrorism Proclamation with a view to bringing this Proclamation into conformity with international human rights standards and narrow the definition of terrorism used (Netherlands); 100. All conclusions and/or recommendations contained in the present report reflect the position of the submitting State(s) and /or the State under review. They should not be construed as endorsed by the Working Group as a whole. Annex COMPOSITION OF THE DELEGATION The delegation of Ethiopia was headed by Ambassador Fisseha Yimer Special Adviser to the Minister, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, and composed of 5 members: Mr. Abey Ybabe, Adviser to the Minister, Attorney-General, Ministry of Justice Mr. Gidey Zerihun, Adviser to the Minister, Ministry of Federal Affairs Mr. Zenebe Kebede, Senior Counsellor, Legal & Consular Affairs General Directorate, Ministry of Foreign Affairs Mr. Melaku Petros, Chargé d’Affaires a.i., Permanent Mission, Geneva Mr. Allehone Mulugeta, First Secretary, Permanent Mission, Geneva 