Distr.: General 11 July 2011 Original: English General Assembly Human Rights Council Eighteenth session Agenda item 6 Universal Periodic Review Report of the Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review* Greece * The annex to the present report is circulated as received. Contents Paragraphs Page Introduction ............................................................................................................... 1-4 3 
I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process................................................. 5-82 3 
A. Presentation by the State under review ............................................................ 5-16 3 
B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review ........................ 17-82 5 
II. Conclusions and/or recommendations...................................................................... 83-86 13  Annex Composition of the delegation ............................................................................................................ 22 Introduction 1. The Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review (UPR), established in accordance with Human Rights Council resolution 5/1 of 18 June 2007, held its eleventh session from 2 to 13 May 2011. The review of Greece was held at the 11th meeting on 9 May 2011. The delegation of Greece was headed by George J. Kaklikis, Permanent Representative of Greece to the United Nations in Geneva. At its 15th meeting, held on 11 May 2011, the Working Group adopted the report on Greece. 2. On 21 June 2010, the Human Rights Council selected the following group of rapporteurs (troika) to facilitate the review of Greece: the Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia and Uganda. 3. In accordance with paragraph 15 of the annex to resolution 5/1, the following documents were issued for the review of Greece: (a) A national report submitted/written presentation made in accordance with paragraph 15 (a) (A/HRC/WG.6/11/GRC/1);  (b) A compilation prepared by OHCHR in accordance with paragraph 15 (b) (A/HRC/WG.6/11/GRC/2); (c) A summary prepared by OHCHR in accordance with paragraph 15 (c) (A/HRC/WG.6/11/GRC/3). 4. A list of questions prepared in advance by Finland, the Netherlands, Norway, Sweden and Turkey was transmitted to Greece through the troika. These questions are available on the extranet of the UPR. I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process A. Presentation by the State under review 5. Greece stressed that its national UPR report was drafted in close cooperation with competent ministries. Consultations were held with civil society stakeholders and the National Commission for Human Rights. The outcome of the UPR will be widely disseminated, and civil society and the national human rights institutions will be closely associated to the follow-up. 6. Irregular migration and the improvement of asylum procedures are among the most pressing challenges that Greece faces. More than 90 per cent of irregular migrants entering the EU are detected at the Greek borders. On the Greek-Turkish land border, there was, in 2010, an increase of 400 per cent in the number of irregular migrants apprehended. Greece is almost facing a humanitarian crisis, at a time of serious financial constraints. A National Action Plan on Migration Management is being implemented. 7. Gender equality is an area where significant progress has been made in the last years, while more needs to be done. The General Secretariat for Gender Equality has launched a National Action Plan on Substantive Gender Equality for 2010-2013. 8. Domestic violence has acquired rather disquieting dimensions. A law to fight domestic violence was adopted in 2006. Counselling and support for victims, as well as training and awareness-raising are the components of the strategy to combat domestic violence. A 24-hour SOS hotline launched in March 2011 is considered as a best practice. 9. Greece stated that it had been severely affected by human trafficking. Greece is currently implementing with success a legal framework for combating trafficking and is determined to become a frontrunner in the fight against trafficking. 10. On the fight against discrimination, a law adopted in 2005 sets out a general framework for implementing the principle of equal treatment regardless of racial or ethnic origin, religious or other beliefs, disability, age or sexual orientation. This law designates or establishes three relevant monitoring bodies, the Greek Ombudsman, the Labour Inspectorate and the Committee for Equal Treatment of the Ministry of Justice. Since 1979, criminal legislation punishes, inter alia, incitement to acts which may result in discrimination, hatred or violence on the grounds of racial or national origin or religion. It criminalizes the expression in public of offensive ideas against any individual or group of individuals, and provides that charges may be pressed ex officio. However, this criminal legislation, implemented by the courts with no Government interference, has had a limited application in practice. Greek society is not immune to extremist ideologies and groups and the authorities have to stay vigilant. There is a need to combat possible attempts by fringe groups who might wish to exploit legitimate concerns of large segments of the population. The relevant legislative framework will be updated and strengthened. 11. On the situation of Roma from 2002 to 2008, an Integrated Action Plan had as its priority segments housing rehabilitation and the provision of supplementary services in education, health, employment, culture and sports. A new strategic framework is to be planned for Roma. Regarding the education of Roma children, further focused action has been taken to increase enrolment and school attendance and to remedy any instances of exclusion of Roma students. 12. On the rights of persons belonging to minorities, the Muslim minority in Thrace consists of three distinct groups whose members are of Turkish, Pomak and Roma origin. Each of these groups has its own spoken language, cultural traditions and heritage, which are fully respected by the Greek State. Persons belonging to the Muslim minority in Thrace are free to declare their origin, speak their language, exercise their religion and manifest their particular customs and traditions. There is no denial of the ethnic identity of these groups. 13. A 1991 law sets out a transparent procedure for the selection of the religious leaders of the Muslim minority, who are subsequently nominated by the State to the three Mufti Offices. The Government is currently considering ways to meet more effectively the needs of the Muslim minority in this field through an open consultation process respecting at the same time the international standards on freedom of religion. 14. On the right to education for persons belonging to the Muslim minority, the Government stands ready to improve the functioning of the existing minority schools and to accommodate the preference for the public educational system increasingly shown by the Muslim minority. 15. Sharia law may be applied in Thrace for the members of the Muslim minority on certain matters of family and inheritance law to the extent that its rules are not in conflict with fundamental values of the Greek society and the Greek legal and constitutional order. As a consequence, the three Muftis in Thrace are bestowed with judicial authority on these matters. Members of the Muslim minority do have the option to take their legal cases on these matters to the local Civil Courts. 16. Greece has been and continues to be committed to strengthening the substantive review by domestic courts of the relevant Muftis’ decisions as to their conformity with the Constitution and international human rights standards, and it is ready to consider and study possible readjustments. B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review 17. During the interactive dialogue, 48 delegations made statements. A number of delegations commended Greece for the consultations with civil society in the preparation for its national report. Recommendations made during the dialogue are to be found in section II of the present report. 18. Algeria noted that Greece ratified several core international human rights instruments, adopted legislative measures and policies to combat discrimination and ensure the principle of equal treatment. Regarding human trafficking, Algeria acknowledged that Greece still faced challenges. Algeria expressed appreciation that Greece in 2007 allocated 0.19 per cent of its gross national income to the official development assistance to developing countries despite its financial problems. Algeria made recommendations. 19. Cyprus noted that law enforcement officials were overwhelmed under the pressure of a constant flow of irregular migrants on a daily basis. Given that the burden of receiving the immense majority of irregular immigrants entering the European Union was also a European problem requiring a joint solution, Cyprus asked Greece to elaborate on how it plans to address these challenges. Cyprus made a recommendation. 20. The Russian Federation noted that the documents submitted for the UPR confirmed that Greece fulfilled its obligations on human rights protection. It appreciated the high level of accession to the international human rights instruments, Greece’s active participation with treaty bodies and special procedures of HRC, and the national human rights institutions in line with the Paris Principles. The Russian Federation made recommendations. 21. India, while noting Greece’s initiatives to promote gender equality, requested information on the measures taken to promote equal opportunities in the labour market, to eliminate occupational segregation and to close the wage gap between women and men. While noting active role of the Office of the Ombudsman and the National Commission for Human Rights, India asked about the implementation of the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination (CERD) recommendation to authorize the Office of the Ombudsman to receive complains on racial discrimination. It made a recommendation. 22. Canada congratulated Greece for its National Action Plan for Migration Management, but noted reports of deteriorating conditions of detention of immigrants. Canada expressed concern that unaccompanied minors are sometimes held in the same detention centres as adults, and women are sometimes held with men, and welcomed information on preventive measures. Canada encouraged Greece to accelerate the planned conversion of existing vacant buildings into detention centres. Canada made recommendations. 23. Turkey commended the efforts of Greece to improve the level of protection of human rights in the country. Turkey made recommendations. 24. Egypt noted the laws and policies aimed at promoting gender equality and empowerment of women, while recognizing the persistent wage gap. It also noted the four-pronged approach to combat human trafficking, especially in women and children. Egypt requested further elaboration on measures to address concerns over a rise in hate speech. It took positive note of Greece’s National Action Plan for Migration Management. Egypt made recommendations. 25. Bulgaria commended Greece for the establishment of the National Commission for Human Rights. While noting legislative measures adopted to promote gender equality in all sectors of society, it asked for information on programmes aimed at changing the stereotypes of roles of women and men. Bulgaria also inquired about the progress achieved regarding the recommendation of the Human Rights Committee to develop a procedure to address specific needs of unaccompanied non-citizens children and ensure their best interest. 26. The Republic of Moldova commended Greece for maintaining good cooperation in promoting and protecting human rights with civil-society, private-sector and United Nations human rights mechanisms. It welcomed Greece’s commitment to promote gender equality in all sectors and also acknowledged the progress achieved in combating human trafficking. It made recommendations. 27. Slovenia noted with appreciation the establishment of a legal and institutional framework for the protection of human rights.  It encouraged Greece to implement the judgements of the European Court of Human Rights related to the violations of human rights of ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities. Slovenia welcomed Greece’s determination to reform its asylum and migration management. It made recommendations. 28. Germany asked for more information about measures to better the humanitarian situation of asylum-seekers and illegal migrants living in camps. Noting that Greece mentioned the creation of an asylum office to fasten applications for asylum, Germany asked about the specific competences of that office. Noting that the Committee on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women was concerned that abortion was often used as a birth control method, Germany asked for information about programmes and policies to solve this problem. 29. Estonia highlighted the ratification of international instruments on children rights. It commended the efforts in fighting discrimination and encouraged Greece to continue its efforts to promote gender equality, in particular the low rate of employment among women. It welcomed the National Programme of Substantive Equality and programmes designed to promote the employment of women. It expressed appreciation for steps addressing irregular immigration, including the new Asylum Service. 30. France asked whether Greece would be in a position to implement by the end of the year the new system of processing asylum applications and thus substantially diminish the number of pending asylum applications. France also asked whether Greece had a time frame for opening new detention centres. France acknowledged measures taken to encourage gender equality, but noted the wage gap and discrimination linked to childbearing. France made recommendations. 31. Chile acknowledged, inter alia, an open invitation to the special procedures, the direct domestication of international treaties, the existence of an Ombudsman and a National Human Rights Commission complying with the Paris Principles. Chile valued the enforcement of the principle of equal treatment and recent legal reforms aimed at eliminating discrimination against women and promoting gender equality. Chile made recommendations. 32. Poland appreciated the establishment of several independent authorities responsible for the protection of human rights and the “A” status granted by the International Co.ordinating Committee to its National Human Rights Committee. It noted that further steps should be taken to ensure that all migrants and asylum-seekers enjoy their rights. It made recommendations. 33. Palestine congratulated Greece on the activities of the press and stated that the situation of illegal migrants was a major challenge because migrants are often subject to inhumane treatment. Palestine stated that, on the other hand, this situation had to be regulated by Europe as a whole. Palestine acknowledged that measures to improve migrants’ situation have been taken. Palestine made recommendations. 34. Portugal noted with appreciation the fact that Greece recognized in its national report that the situation of asylum-seekers was a major challenge that needed to be addressed as a matter of priority. Portugal sought further information on the reform of the asylum system initiated in 2010 and asked Greece to share some preliminary results of its implementation. Portugal made recommendations. 35. Norway was worried about the humanitarian situation of illegal migrants residing in Greece awaiting their deportation. It considered vital that unaccompanied children have access to effective guardianship and advocacy. Norway noted the absence of legislation protecting individuals from discrimination based on sexual orientation and gender identity. Norway made recommendations. 36. Argentina thanked the Greek delegation for the information provided on the management of migratory flows and the integration of social minorities in terms of access to work, housing education and health care. It recognized Greece’s support to the functioning and financing of human rights bodies.  Argentina made recommendations. 37. Lebanon noted Greece’s ratification of the core human rights agreements and fulfilling its reporting obligations. It further noted Greece’s efforts to combat discrimination and to promote gender equality. Lebanon asked Greece to further elaborate on measures adopted to ensure burden sharing with other EU countries to deal with the increasing flows of irregular migrants. It made recommendations. 38. Armenia appreciated efforts to prevent ill treatment and torture. It expressed appreciation for the commitment to forge global international cooperation on migration, such as the third Global Forum of Migration and Development hosted in Athens. It encouraged Greece to strengthen efforts to prevent and punish human trafficking and to protect trafficked victims, to eliminate stigmatization and and cooperate with countries of origin. It made recommendations. 39. Hungary commended Greece for efforts in tackling overpopulation of prisons though detention prison conditions were still disturbing. It expressed concern about insufficient legal aid and inadequate language interpretations for asylum-seekers. Hungary asked for information on the shortage of interpreters; on access to a fair asylum procedure; on the timeline for registration and efficient processing of asylum applications. Hungary also encouraged Greece to follow up with child abuse cases to bring those responsible to justice. Hungary made a recommendation. 40. Italy noted that Greece had adopted legislative measures and policies to promote gender equality and fight against discrimination of women. Italy further noted that Greece, over the last decade, had taken initiatives at legislative and operational levels, in cooperation with the International Organization for Migration (IOM), to combat trafficking. It encouraged Greece to continue the fight against child and women trafficking. 41. Switzerland noted that the use of excessive force by the police is a reality in several countries, as well as mistreatment by security forces.  Victims are often vulnerable groups such as migrants, asylum-seekers or minority members. Switzerland welcomed the legislative reforms on asylum request, which constitute a progress for the asylum–seekers’ protection. Switzerland made recommendations. 42. Denmark acknowledged the National Action Plan for Migration Management, but noted that the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) continues to characterize the situation as a “humanitarian crisis”. It expressed concern about unaccompanied minors and vulnerable groups. It noted that the Special Rapporteur on the question of torture described several shortcomings in Greek prisons, and that measures have already been taken to improve the situation for detainees in prisons and those held in police custody. It made recommendations. 43. Greece responded that on the issues of irregular migration, asylum procedures and unaccompanied minors, new amendments have been brought to Greek legislation.  44. On the improvement of the asylum procedures, Presidential Decree 114/2010 provided for the creation of a flexible and decentralized system for the rapid review of asylum requests, with the participation of UNHCR. Law 3907/2011 establishes a new Asylum Agency and a First Reception Service for Immigrants, which will result in the decrease of the number of persons detained in police stations. In the reception centres to be established, a new screening process will allow the identification among those illegally entering Greece, of persons belonging to vulnerable groups, asylum-seekers, and persons entitled to international protection. 45. Five Independent Appeal Boards are already operational and will deal with the problem of backlog of 47,000 asylum applications. In addition, 17 Appeal Boards have been set up already. 46. Greece is making efforts to improve detention facilities and prisons. Six new detention facilities have been constructed since 2001. Legislation enhances non-custodial measures. 47. Regarding unaccompanied minors, every case of an unaccompanied minor entering Greece illegally is reported to the Public Prosecutor. In the detention centres, unaccompanied minors are separated from adults in especially designed areas, under special hospitality and protection, until the determining of their age, origin and asylum status. If they apply for asylum, legislation foresees that the competent authorities shall ensure that their housing needs are satisfactory and will protect the minor from the risk of trafficking or exploitation. 48. Regarding allegations of abuse by police personnel, Law 3938/2011 establishes, within the Ministry of Citizen Protection, an Office responsible for addressing instances of arbitrariness by the staff of the Police, the Coast Guard and the Fire Brigade. This Office is responsible for collecting, recording, evaluating and investigating complaints of acts of torture, ill-treatment, illegal use of fire arms and insulting behaviour. 49. With regard to the situation of Roma, the 2002 National Action Plan addressed discrimination and social exclusion. With regard to forced evictions, a measure of last resort, in case of unlawful settlements in private or public properties, all related police activities are conducted in a socially sensitive and tactful manner. In addition, pending finalization of the draft strategy for Roma which will take over from the National Action Plan, several procedural guarantees are elaborated. Adequate prior identification, notification and consultation, and alternative accommodation are examined under the current drafting period. 50. On the question regarding the general “minority protection” of persons who belong to groups that have not been recognized as minorities, Greece emphasizes that it fully respects the human rights of individuals who declare that they belong to a certain group regardless of the fact that this group has not been officially recognized or officially granted a status of minority in Greece. As regards the question of the Muslim minority in Thrace and particularly of the administration and management of the Muslim Foundations in Thrace, a law was passed in 2008 that responds to a long-standing request of the Muslim minority to have the members of its three main management committees elected. The need to renew by election the members of these three Muslim Waqf management committees remains pertinent. In conjunction with the selection of the muftis in Thrace, the Government is engaged to find through amendments or possible adjustments the proper way to deal with this issue. As for the withdrawal of the Greek citizenship from some members of the Muslim minority in Thrace, in 1998 the Government repealed article 19 of the citizenship code which allowed for the withdrawal of Greek nationality from persons who abandoned Greece with no intention to return. Among those people who left the country on their own will, many renounced the Greek nationality and acquired a foreign nationality. There is a very small number of Muslims who are stateless as a result of the deprivation of their nationality. For these individuals who reside in Thrace, a special ID card has been provided. Concrete steps have been undertaken to restore the Greek nationality of these few stateless people. 51. Regarding freedom of association and the three judgments of the European Court of Human Rights about an equal number of associations in Thrace that were not registered with the competent courts, these cases are pending before the competent civil courts in Greece. There is a very constructive dialogue with the department for the execution of the European Court judgments of the Council of Europe. However, there is a large number of Muslim minority associations and NGOs that have been registered with the competent courts and they operate unimpeded in the area of Thrace. 52. As for the situation of Greek Muslims in two of islands in Dodecanese, Rhodes and Kos, these individuals are fully integrated in the local societies. They represent an excellent example of peaceful and harmonious coexistence with the local society. Their religious freedom is fully respected and they choose, without any intervention, their Islamic preachers. There are two functioning mosques, in Rhodes and Kos. 53. The delegation stated that the Government is clearly committed to the building of a mosque in Athens. Technical and procedural issues have delayed the construction and the Ministry of Education, Lifelong Learning and Religious Affairs is trying to resolve the problem through consultations with the competent agencies. On the opening of a mosque in the area of Thessaloniki, Greece stated that this question is under consideration by the Greek authorities. 54. In regard to gender equality and questions related to the employment of women, the three pillars of the National Action Plan were referred to: improvement of the relevant legislation, gender equality policies and gender mainstreaming. The plan promotes protection of women’s rights through the promotion of gender equality, prevention and combating of all forms of violence against women, support for women’s employment and economic independence. On the role of the Greek Ombudsman in this regard, it noted that the Greek Ombudsman has been designated as the competent body for monitoring the implementation of the principle of equal treatment between men and women and his responsibilities have progressively been broadened in this area. However, patriarchal attitudes and stereotypes have not been eradicated. As for women’s unemployment, the reduction of gender discrimination on the labour market is dealt with through cross-cutting measures but also through programmes for unemployed women aiming to enhance their effective access to the labour market and to eliminate of social exclusion. In 2010, the law that was adopted on the implementation of the principle of equal opportunities and equal treatment of men and women in employment and occupation improves, simplifies and codifies other legislation. 55. In regard to questions related to trafficking in human beings, Greece has implemented a comprehensive legal framework for combating trafficking, comprising preventive activities, criminalization of the relevant offenses, assistance to victims, effective police action, cooperation with countries of origin, and signature and ratification of international and regional treaties, in particular the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and its Protocols. The broader National and European Planning was presented in October 2010. 56. Australia congratulated Greece on its legislation on equal treatment and acknowledged recent legislation on gender discrimination. Australia urged Greece to continue efforts to establish prison conditions in compliance with the 1999 Prison Law. Australia expressed concern about reported cases of Roma peoples being unable to register to vote. It encouraged Greece to take further action to remove impediments to accessing Government-held information. Australia made recommendations. 57. Guatemala commended Greece for having ratified most of the main international human rights instruments and hoped for the prompt accession to those still pending.  It acknowledged Greece’s cooperation with the human rights mechanisms and its financial contribution to OHCHR. Guatemala regarded the National Action Plan for the Management of Migratory Flows and the measures for social integration as a good first step in order to guarantee the rights of migrants.  Guatemala made a recommendation. 58. The Netherlands noted that the current economic crisis seems to exacerbate, inter alia, gender disparities, especially regarding unemployment and salary gap. It underlined the situation of Muslim women in Thrace, who can choose between the regular Greek legal system and the intervention of State-appointed muftis who, in the past, had applied a conservative version of sharia law.  The Netherlands also expressed concern at the fate of unaccompanied minors after being released from detention centres. It made recommendations. 59. Albania welcomed the reforms made within the framework of the National Action Plan to improve the asylum system and the management of migratory flows. It noted with satisfaction the adoption of legislative measures, which endeavour to improve the system for acquiring citizenship and political rights. These amendments will favour and further social integration of migrants, including Albanian migrants living in Greece. It made recommendations. 60. Brazil noted recent legal reforms aimed at eliminating discrimination against women and promoting gender equality. It encouraged Greece to continue pursuing measures to mitigate the potential negative impact of the current financial situation on the enjoyment of human rights, particularly of the most vulnerable. Brazil was concerned over reports of increasing ill-treatment by law enforcement officials and racist violence. Brazil made recommendations. 61. Austria commended Greece for taking effective steps to prevent human rights abuses by the police and law enforcement officials and asked whether there were any additional measures planned to counter the persistence of this problem. It also asked Greece to outline the follow-up to the recommendations made by the independent expert on minority issues after her visit in 2008. Austria asked what further measures Greece intended to take to fully implement the law on domestic violence. Austria made recommendations. 62. Spain congratulated Greece for the signature of the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, and the National Action Plan for the Management of Migratory Flows.  Spain asked when the Parliament would vote on the bill for the establishment of an office, within the Ministry for Public Order, responsible for receiving individual complaints on arbitrary acts committed by security forces. Spain made recommendations. 63. Slovakia acknowledged the challenges faced in the area of irregular migration. It commended the equal treatment of asylum-seekers and refugees as Greek citizens regarding work permits. It noted that in 2007, the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW) expressed concern about the trafficking in women and girls and about the insufficient enforcement of relevant legislation. It noted concern at allegations of discrimination against members of religious minorities. It made recommendations. 64. Mexico acknowledged Greece’s efforts to improve its legal and institutional framework. Measures to eliminate women’s discrimination and to offer equal labour conditions to asylum-seekers were just a token of this commitment. At the same time, it noted that challenges persisted, particularly in the area of migration and ethnic minorities. Mexico made recommendations. 65. China commented Greece's efforts towards promoting gender equality and protecting the rights of women and children. China stated that Greece had taken active measures in protecting the rights of minorities, such as the Roma, in terms of health services, housing, employment and education. Whilst China understood the difficulties faced by Greece due to the financial situation, it hoped that Greece would continue to take effective measures to guarantee the various economic and social rights of its people. 66. Morocco congratulated Greece for its combat against intolerance and all forms of racial discrimination through human rights education and training. It noted that according to the European Court of Human Rights, Greece was facing problems regarding the length of judicial proceedings. Morocco also noted that Greece was party to almost all fundamental human rights treaties and regional instruments. Morocco made recommendations. 67. The United States of America encouraged Greece to continue to address issues of migration and to combat human trafficking. It stated that despite some positive steps Roma continue to face impediments accessing education, employment, and social services. The United States encouraged Greece to make more progress in providing equal educational opportunities for children with disabilities and employment prospects for disabled persons. The United States remained concerned over incidents of anti-Semitism and about vandalism of Muslim sites. It made recommendations. 68. Sweden welcomed the National Action Plan for Migration Management. It noted concern about the situation of refugees, asylum-seekers and other migrants regarding access to the asylum procedure, the quality of the procedures, the number of granted asylums and the conditions in detention centres for migrants. It mentioned reports indicating that parts of the Roma population experience inequalities regarding housing, education and access to the labour market. It made recommendations. 69. Qatar welcomed the establishment the Ombudsman office and the National Committee for Human Rights. Regarding the increasing waves of irregular migrants and asylum-seekers, and the resulting tensions with right-wing groups, Qatar encouraged Greece to deal with these categories in accordance with international standards and commitments. Qatar asked for information on the most important measures taken to face the challenges owing to the presence of a large number of migrants. Qatar made recommendations. 70. The United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland congratulated Greece for its chairmanship of the Human Security Network. It welcomed the recent progress on citizenship and local electoral rights for migrants. The United Kingdom welcomed the introduction of legislation regarding the excessive length of judicial proceedings, and hoped the proposed legal framework for a police complaints mechanism would enable the authority to work effectively and independently. It made recommendations. 71. Georgia welcomed the measures aimed at the promotion and the protection of the rights of minorities and the rights of Greek Roma people, by establishing the National Action Plan for the inclusion of socially vulnerable groups of population.  Georgia commended the measures on the elimination of all forms of discrimination, and steps for ensuring gender equality, especially legislative provisions for the increase of women participation in the decision-making process. 72. Indonesia noted that asylum-seekers and refugees enjoy equal treatment with Greek citizens with regard to issuance of work permits under law, however, practical barriers were often imposed by authorities. It asked Greece what measures could be put in place to address this problem. It also acknowledged that Greece had created independent authorities and national human rights institutions such as the Greek Ombudsman and the National Commission for Human Rights, and asked Greece to share best practices in this field. Indonesia made recommendations. 73. Bangladesh encouraged Greece to keep its door open for migrants. Noting concern expressed by CERD at cases of ill-treatment of asylum-seekers and illegal migrants, Bangladesh acknowledged that many situations could be mitigated by burden-sharing by European Union members. Bangladesh asked how Greece contemplates the integration of the migrant population, keeping in view their fundamental rights. Bangladesh made recommendations. 74. Ukraine acknowledged the challenges posed by the current economic situation and inquired as to the measures to mitigate the effects of fiscal adjustments in social and economic sectors. It also inquired about the preliminary results of measures to ensure the implementation of the National Action Plan on the reform of the asylum system and migration management, particularly on the screening of irregular migrants and their detention and repatriation. It welcomed measures on trafficking in human beings and encouraged additional efforts in this area. It made a recommendation. 75. Ecuador noted that Greece was party to most international human rights instruments and that it had implemented with a certain success legal and policy reforms to eliminate discrimination against women, promote gender equality and improve the situation of the Roma minority.  Ecuador was aware that Greece was still suffering the effects of the 2010 economic crisis and that budget constraints would affect the living standards of the Greek people. Ecuador made recommendations. 76. Botswana recognized both the achievements that Greece has made, and its admission that there were challenges ahead to fully realize all human rights. Botswana expressed appreciation for the responses provided and requested additional information on the measures Greece envisaged taking on overcrowding in prisons, and on the specific measures that Greece intended to undertake regarding the persistence of trafficking in women and girls. It made a recommendation. 77. Senegal regretted that the national report did not include broader developments on the social, economic and cultural aspects of the human rights situation, and its limits and challenges due to the economic difficulties. Senegal welcomed the protective policy measures for women at the criminal and professional level. Senegal asked for information about the size of the Muslim community, which, as reported by CERD, was a victim of intolerance and racial discrimination, notably perpetrated by the media. Senegal made recommendations.  78. Iraq paid tribute to Greece's efforts to promote equality between men and women in education. It took note with concern of the increasing unemployment rate and the rising pay gap between men and women despite the fact that equal pay is guaranteed in the Constitution. Iraq urged Greece to take measures such as awareness-raising campaigns to try and equalize the pay gap. It made recommendations. 79. Greece responded that on questions related to the education of migrant children, the large influx of immigration has had an immediate effect on the composition of the primary and secondary school classes that became increasingly heterogeneous. Further aid for foreign pupils is now offered through a new programme, “Education of Foreign and Repatriate Pupils”, which since 2010 has been implemented by the Aristotle University of Thessaloniki under the supervision of the Greek Ministry of Education, Lifelong Learning and Religious Affairs. Also, some administrative measures have been taken with the aim of upholding the right of all children to education. Migrant, refugee and repatriate students enjoy the right to free education as natives do. Every child is entitled to education regardless of their parents’ or guardians’ legal status. Certain administrative adaptations have been made to facilitate the registration of foreign students who at the time do not possess appropriate official documents. The 2010 Law on the acquisition of Greek citizenship allows the child of a foreigner who has completed six school years in Greece and lives permanently and legally in the country to acquire the Greek citizenship. 80. On the right to vote of the Roma population, the delegation highlighted that Greek Roma are Greek citizens and thus enjoy by virtue of the Constitution all civil and political rights granted to Greek citizens, including electoral and voting rights. They participate in and form political parties. They vote and get elected, in particular in local government structures. For those not registered with the municipal registries, due to lack of certain documents, particular circulars of the Ministry of Interior were issued. Under the current strategic reform, remaining issues on civic status are further elaborated on the basis of recommendations made by independent authorities in Greece, the Ombudsman and the National Commission on Human Rights. Particular projects have been implemented under the Integrated Action Plan to address existing inequalities while accessing housing, employment and other social services. An important amount of State mortgages have been allocated to Roma families for purchasing or constructing a house. This was extensively amended in 2006 in order to adopt social assessment criteria, considering the particular needs of the Roma population like for minors, persons with disabilities etc., to introduce participatory procedures at the local level as well as safeguards to the use of the loans. Following recent legal reform of the local authorities’ responsibilities, local cooperation is ensured through the establishment of a department for social affairs at the regional level to facilitate housing rehabilitation issues for Roma at the local level. An important number of employment projects will be further elaborated under the new strategic framework for Roma employment. 81. Regarding the few incidents of vandalism, the delegation stated that these did not reflect any anti-Semitic sentiment. Incidents of vandalism and desecration of monuments are thoroughly investigated and publicly condemned in the strongest possible terms and at the highest political levels. 82. The delegation concluded by commenting on the very difficult economic situation that Greece is facing. Every effort is being made to mitigate effects of measures and policies for the most vulnerable groups of the population in order to establish adequate safety nets, to safeguard the social welfare state which is a pillar of the Greek Constitution and to lead the country back to the path of sustainable economic development and promoting the enjoyment of economic and social life for all. II. Conclusions and/or recommendations 83. The recommendations below formulated during the interactive dialogue have been examined by Greece and enjoy its support: 83.1. Ratify the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (Algeria, Austria, Brazil, France, Ukraine) that it has already signed in 2007 (Algeria) and its Optional Protocol (Austria, Ukraine); 83.2. Consider ratifying the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (Argentina, India), to which it is a signatory (India); 83.3. Adopt or ratify the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and its Optional Protocol (Ecuador); 83.4. Redouble efforts to ensure access to public places and labour market to persons with disabilities and to ratify the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (Morocco); 83.5. Ratify the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance, and the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and its Optional Protocol (Spain); 83.6. Consider ratifying the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance (Argentina); 83.7. Ratify the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from the Enforced and Involuntary Disappearance (Armenia); 83.8. Proceed to the ratification of International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance as soon as possible and fully recognize the competence of the Committee on Enforced Disappearance, as provided for in articles 31 and 32 of the Convention (France); 83.9. Continue efforts directed to achieving gender equality, and fully implement the National Programme for Substantive Equality for 2010–2013 (Russian Federation); 83.10. Accelerate the implementation of the National Action Plan for Migration Management (Canada); 83.11. Continue to implement the National Action Plan on Asylum Reform and Migration Management to address legal and institutional shortcomings (Australia); 83.12. Give priority to the implementation of the National Action Plan for the reform of the asylum system and migration management (Netherlands); 83.13. Strengthen further the effective implementation of the National Plan of Action against Trafficking in Human Beings, in line with suggestions made by CEDAW (Chile); 83.14. Implement recommendations and decision of human rights protection mechanisms, including special procedures (Austria); 83.15. Enhance accessibility of the United Nations Human Rights system for all members of Greek society by ensuring the translation into Greek of its UPR outcome and relevant treaty body concluding observations and special procedures country reports (Canada); 83.16. Continue its activities in full cooperation with NGOs and civil society organizations in order to guarantee the effective and equal application of all human rights (Palestine); 83.17. Take more efforts to eliminate discrimination against women (Bangladesh); 83.18. Take steps to bring about changes in attitudes with a view to eliminating patriarchal attitudes and stereotypes regarding the roles of women and men in the family and society, including through awareness-raising and public education campaigns (Moldova); 83.19. Intensify its efforts to change stereotypical images and discriminatory attitudes and perceptions about the roles and responsibilities of women and men in the family and in society (Portugal); 83.20. Take further measures in order to fully implement the already existing domestic legislation in the field of gender equality (Indonesia); 83.21. Develop measures aimed at addressing women’s low occupational representation and the promotion of diversification of women’s academic and professional choices, including in non-traditional fields (Portugal); 83.22. Take action with regard to the impediments that Muslim minority women in Thrace may face when sharia law is applied on family and inheritance law matters (Netherlands)1; 83.23. Take measures to strengthen legal and institutional mechanisms aimed at preventing, punishing and eliminating all forms of discrimination, including discrimination based on gender, racial and national origin, and religion (Argentina); 83.24. Pursue its efforts to combat racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance (Algeria); 83.25. Effectively implement legal provisions aimed at eliminating racial discrimination (Bangladesh); 83.26. Take effective measures to combat the persistence of stereotypes based on racial discrimination and intolerance (Senegal); 83.27. Contribute to the effective investigation, prosecution and punishment of incitement to hatred and hate speech (Egypt); 83.28. Further ensure that racially motivated crimes are effectively prosecuted and punished and that research to evaluate the incidence of racial discrimination is conducted with the aim of adopting targeted measures to eliminate such discrimination (Brazil); 83.29. Adopt mitigating measures to protect its most vulnerable population: women heads of household, the unemployed, farmers, retired people, children, persons with disabilities, et alia (Ecuador); 83.30. Include sexual orientation and gender identity as grounds for protection in anti-discrimination legislation and policies (Norway); 83.31. Ensure the effective and full implementation of the law adopted in 2006 to fight domestic violence (Austria); 83.32. Strengthen efforts to effectively fight against the phenomenon of violence against women (Morocco); 83.33. Take necessary steps to implement the relevant plan of action adopted by the National Coordination Mechanism, as a part of its ongoing fight against trafficking in human beings (Russian Federation); 83.34. Increase efforts to prevent trafficking in women and girls and provide support to victims effectively by implementing the integrated National Plan of Action against Trafficking in Human Beings and fully enforcing the legislation on trafficking (Republic of Moldova); 83.35. Intensify its efforts to combat trafficking in human beings with a special attention to the needs of the victims (Algeria); 1 	The original wording: “Take action with regard to the impediments that Muslim women may face on matters such as marriage and inheritance as a result of the non-application of the general law of Greece to these women (Netherlands)”. 83.36. Take additional measures to prevent and combat trafficking in human beings, and to protect victims and prosecute traffickers (United States of America); 83.37. Continue its efforts to combat transnational child trafficking and exploitation (Republic of Moldova); 83.38. Take an initiative to draft a law that would establish an independent bureau under the direct authority of the Ministry of Citizen’s Protection to deal with incidents of arbitrary conduct by law enforcement officials (Turkey); 83.39. Take steps to prevent attacks against immigrants and hate speech (Turkey); 83.40. Ensure prompt and impartial investigations of cases of excessive use of force by the police and law enforcement officials (Austria); 83.41. Continue pursuing measures aimed at improving police accountability and prioritizing alleged instances of misconduct (Lebanon); 83.42. Regarding the use of excessive force by the police, implement an independent complaint mechanism, which will investigate any allegation concerning violence, acts of torture and other mistreatments by the police (Switzerland); 83.43. Build upon its achievement in the area of human rights education and training, particularly for public officials, to strengthen the fight against alleged police violence (Botswana); 83.44. Continue efforts to combat human rights violations in the public administration (Indonesia); 83.45. Reduce the use of pretrial detention, ensuring judicial review, establishing an independent police complaints mechanism and speeding up trials (Hungary); 83.46. Quickly establish an independent and effective police complaints mechanism (United Kingdom); 83.47. Make the necessary efforts so that judicial proceedings do not suffer undue delay, and implement a system that prevents people of different sex being detained in the same facilities, and sometimes even mixed with minors (Spain); 83.48. Continue its efforts in improving the situation of detainees in Greek prisons and those held in police custody (Denmark); 83.49. Establish prison conditions that comply with the provisions of the 1999 Prison Law (Australia); 83.50. Adopt appropriate legislative or administrative measures for effective access to justice, including the right to legal redress in the courts (Mexico); 83.51. Take all necessary, prompt and effective measures to remedy the problem of the length of the judicial procedure (Morocco); 83.52. Implement measures to ensure speedier resolution of legal cases, for example, encouraging out of courts settlements and better use of information technology (United Kingdom); 83.53. Consider appropriate, effective measures to provide for a better promotion and protection of the freedom of religion or belief (Slovakia); 83.54. Continue to take measures to safeguard religious freedom and promote tolerance among its inhabitants (United States of America); 83.55. Take appropriate measures to ensure the effective enjoyment of the right to freedom of expression, peaceful assembly and association, particularly in the case of national, ethnic and religious minorities (Mexico); 83.56. Take steps to improve transparency, including by improving citizens’ rights to access Government-held information (Australia); 83.57. Take measures to accelerate the increase in women’s political participation at all levels of political and public life, particularly in Parliament and in the foreign services (Republic of Moldova); 83.58. Allocate a greater space for women’s participation in the political sphere (Senegal); 83.59. Take measures to encourage the return of women to the labour market after a long absence due to maternity (France); 83.60. Take special measures for unemployed women (Netherlands); 83.61. Uphold respect for and protection of the rights of all individuals to self-identification, freedom of expression and freedom of association, including for the members of ethnic, religious and linguistic groups that are not officially recognized as minorities (Slovenia); 83.62. Continue its work for the realization of human rights of the Roma population in the country and to focus on implementation of adopted strategies at a local level as well as on countering discrimination by private actors (Sweden); 83.63. Take measures to provide Roma with increased opportunities for education and employment (United States); 83.64. Accelerate the process for the building of a mosque in Votanikos, Athens, without further delay (Turkey); 83.65. Rapidly incorporate the adopted legislative amendments in order that its asylum system will be fully in conformity with regional and international norms in the field of human rights (Switzerland); 83.66. Continue giving priority to introducing legislative amendments and implementing actions aiming at respecting human rights of all migrants and speeding asylum procedures (Lebanon); 83.67. Consider establishing and implementing a comprehensive asylum system consistent with international and regional standards on protection and reception of asylum-seekers and irregular migrants, with an allocation of adequate resources (Poland); 83.68. Ensure that asylum-seekers and irregular migrants are treated according to Greece’s human rights obligations and strengthen all efforts to implement the national action plan on asylum reform and migration management (Austria); 83.69. Undertake a review of detention conditions for asylum-seekers to ensure they are fully in line with international and European standards (Canada); 83.70. Commit to speedily implement an effective asylum system consistent with EU standards (United Kingdom); 83.71. Resort to forced expulsions only within the strict respect of regional and international norms (Switzerland); 83.72. Take steps to protect asylum-seekers and ensure respect for the principle of non-refoulement in accordance with international refugee law and international human rights law (Canada); 83.73. Ensure that no individual is directly or indirectly “refouled” to their country of origin, or any other country where they may face persecution (Poland); 83.74. Take further measures to improve the treatment of asylum-seekers and to ensure that deportation processes are carried out after exhaustion of legal remedies (Brazil); 83.75. Formalize a closer cooperation with local and international NGOs, in order to make a better use of available resources, when addressing the difficult humanitarian situation in Greece today (Norway); 83.76. Continue to implement measures within the framework of the presidential decree that set the framework for addressing the situation of unaccompanied minors (Chile); 83.77. Continue its efforts to ensure the observance of fundamental rights and international standards in the context of asylum procedures, particularly with regard to the treatment of unaccompanied minors (Argentina); 83.78. When reforming the asylum system and migration management, pay special attention to the needs of unaccompanied minors in all processes that pertain to solving their cases, and prevent administrative detention from being a standard practice for new irregular migrants (Slovenia); 83.79. Take immediate measures to make sure that all unaccompanied children are given a guardian and a safe residence when they arrive in Greece (Norway); 83.80. Take further steps to enhance the number and quality of available accommodation facilities and other services offered to minors and vulnerable groups arriving in Greece (Denmark); 83.81. Pay special attention to the position of unaccompanied minor immigrants (Netherlands); 83.82. Continue addressing irregular migration as a matter of priority, reinforcing further its efforts, such as the recently adopted National Action Plan for Migration Management (Slovakia); 83.83. Reinforce implementation of the relevant legal and policy framework with a view to combating efficiently trafficking in women, providing victims with all necessary assistance including legal redress, rehabilitation and social integration (Slovakia); 83.84. Devise a long-term Government strategy aimed at integration of immigrants (Poland); 83.85. Increase its budget for migration detention centres and migrant care through intensified cooperation with EU partners (United States); 83.86. Ensure detention conditions for irregular migrants are in conformity with EU human rights standards (United Kingdom); 83.87. Work for amelioration of the situation of migrants, particularly in regards to access to and quality of the asylum procedure, the conditions in detention centres and to ensure that protection is granted to refugees in line with its international obligations, by implementing the National Action Plan for Migration Management and taking necessary further actions (Sweden); 83.88. Continue efforts aimed at improving the administrative and legal services and the living conditions of irregular migrants and asylum-seekers, especially vulnerable categories, such as women and children (Qatar); 83.89. Establish a new unit in the Ministry for Citizen Protection, and continue the reform aimed at training police officers in order to deal with asylum-seekers and migrants in accordance with international criteria for human rights (Qatar); 83.90. Design and implement a comprehensive policy on care and protection to migrants, refugees and asylum-seekers in Greece (Ecuador); 83.91. Implement measures to curb abuses against refugees and migrants, including minors, regardless of their immigration status, perpetrated by police authorities, and punish adequately those responsible, so to avoid impunity (Ecuador); 83.92. Take the necessary measures to ensure that no asylum-seeker is sent back immediately to its country of origin or any other country where his/her life is in danger, in accordance with applicable international norms (Ecuador); 83.93. Improve the space and sanitary conditions of shelters for migrants, refugees and asylum-seekers, so that they comply with international and regional standards (Ecuador); 83.94. Strengthen, in close cooperation with relevant stakeholders, the capacity to process, treat and shelter asylum-seekers and irregular migrants, in accordance with relevant regional and international standards (Mexico); 83.95. Improve the treatment of migrants, asylum-seekers and refugees (Iraq); 83.96. Undertake the process of consultations with civil society stakeholders and the National Commission for Human Rights in the follow-up to the UPR review (Austria); 83.97. Continue its commendable engagement in the field of the international development cooperation despite current challenges (Algeria). 84. The following recommendations will be examined by Greece which will provide responses in due time, but no later than the eighteenth session of the Human Rights Council in September 2011: 84.1. Accede to the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (Ukraine); 84.2. Sign and ratify the Optional Protocol of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (Portugal, Spain) allowing individual complaints of alleged violations of these rights to be heard by CESCR (Portugal); 84.3. Ratify a certain number of human rights treaties such as the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, and the Optional Protocol to the Convention Against Torture (Palestine); 84.4. Proceed with the ratification of the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (Cyprus); 84.5. Consider (Brazil) ratifying the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (Armenia, Brazil); 84.6. Ratify the remaining human rights instruments, especially the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (Slovenia); 84.7. Consider the gradual ratification of pending international instruments (Chile); 84.8. Ratify the 1961 Convention on the Reduction of Statelessness (Slovakia); 84.9. Develop and implement a National Action Plan on Human Rights in order to have a systematic strategy for the promotion and protection of human rights (Spain); 84.10. Incorporate in the legislation the combat against discrimination based on gender identity or expression (Spain); 84.11. Consider recognizing same-sex couples (Brazil); 84.12. Take supplementary measures to remedy the situation reported by the NGO ARSIS which would suggest that efforts to reinforce by legislation the fight against exploitation and sexual abuse have not eliminated the problem of child exploitation, in particular for “street children” (France); 84.13. Include information about Greece being a country of destination and transit for human trafficking in school curriculums at secondary and university levels (Iraq); 84.14. Collect disaggregated data on the dissemination of hate speech against minorities (Egypt); 84.15. Consider opening of one of the historical mosques in Thessaloniki, where significant number of Muslim population live (Turkey); 84.16. Be more flexible on the preconditions set for minaret construction (Turkey); 84.17. Execute the judgments of the European Court of Human Rights regarding the applications of the Turkish Union of Xanthi, the Cultural Association of Turkish Women of Rodopi and the Evros Minority Youth Association (Turkey); 84.18. On the one hand, constantly reflect on human rights when processing the request of asylum-seekers and refugees, specifically focusing on their individual situation, their detention conditions and the eventual organization of their repatriation and, on the other hand, solicit the necessary support of the European Union in this regard (Senegal). 85. The following recommendations did not enjoy the support of Greece: 85.1. Sign (Egypt) and ratify the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families (Albania, Egypt, Senegal, Palestine); accede to the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families, as another significant step in the protection of human rights (Guatemala); continue its efforts by ratifying the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families (Morocco); consider ratifying the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families (Argentina); adopt or ratify the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families (Ecuador); consider adhering to the Convention on the Rights of All Migrant Workers and the Members of Their Families as recommended by the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe in its recommendation number 1737 of 17 March 2006 (Algeria); 85.2. Create a mechanism to overcome the difficulties faced by non-Greek speakers during detention and court ruling phases (Turkey); 85.3. Ensure equal rights for minority citizens such as the Roma, particularly the right to vote (Australia); 85.4. Take necessary steps to ensure the election of the muftis by the Turkish Muslim Minority and repeal the relevant articles of the Law No. 3536 regarding the appointment of imams, which the minority has severely opposed (Turkey); 85.5. Revise the relevant legislation concerning the Waqfs in consultation with the minority with a view to enabling the minority to directly control and to use its own Waqf properties, and to put an end to misuse and expropriation of Waqf properties (Turkey); 85.6. Initiate procedures for the opening of Turkish-language kindergartens for minority children in Komotini and Xanthi (Turkey); 85.7. Speed up the process of reinstating the citizenship of approximately 60,000 Greek citizens who were deprived of Greek citizenship, because of the later repelled article 19 of the Greek Citizenship Law. Create a mechanism to compensate their losses in terms of ownership rights that occurred as a result of the process (Turkey); 85.8. Start a dialogue with the NGOs of the Turkish communities in Rhodes and Kos for the solution of their problems in the field of religious freedom and resume Turkish-language education, which has been denied since 1972 (Turkey); 85.9. Implement effectively the National Action Plan for migrants and protect the rights and interests of migrants without prejudice to their status, and minorities including Muslims and Roma population (Bangladesh). 86. All conclusions and/or recommendations contained in the present report reflect the position of the submitting State(s) and/or the State under review. They should not be construed as endorsed by the Working Group as a whole. Annex Composition of the delegation The delegation of Greece was headed by H.E. Ambassador George J. KAKLIKIS, Permanent Representative of Greece to the United Nations in Geneva, Head of Delegation and composed of the following members: • Mrs Maria TELALIAN, Head of the Public International Law Legal Department, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Deputy Head of Delegation; • Mrs 	Constantina ATHANASSIADOU. Deputy Permanent Representative, Permanent Mission of Greece, Geneva; • Mr. Alexios Marios LYBEROPOULOS, First Counsellor, Permanent Mission of Greece, Geneva; • Mrs Maria ZISSI, First Counsellor, Acting Director, D4 Directorate for Human Rights, Ministry of Foreign Affairs; • Mrs Evgenia 	BENIATOGLOU, First Secretary, Permanent Mission of Greece, Geneva; • Mr Elias KASTANAS, Deputy Legal Advisor, Legal Department, Section of Public International Law, Ministry of Foreign Affairs; • Ms. Louiza KYRIAKAKI, Senior Officer, Directorate of Development Programs and International Organizations, Ministry of Interior; • Mr. Andreas 	KARAGEORGOS, Police Captain, Hellenic Police HQ, Aliens Division, Ministry of citizen protection; • Ms Aikaterini TOURA, Senior Officer, Directorate of International Relations in Education, Ministry of Education, Lifelong Learning and Religious Affairs. 