Distr.: General 16 June 2010 Original: English General Assembly Human Rights Council Fifteenth session Agenda item 6 Universal Periodic Review Report of the Working Group on the UniversalPeriodic Review* Grenada * Previously issued under document symbol A/HRC//WG.6/8/L.11. The annex to the present report is circulated as received. Contents Paragraphs Page Introduction............................................................................................................. 1–4 3 I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process................................................ 5–70 3 A. Presentation by the State under review........................................................... 5–35 3 B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review........................ 36–70 7 II. Conclusions and/or recommendations..................................................................... 71 11  Annex Composition of the delegation ......................................................................................................... 18 Introduction 1. The Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review, established in accordance with Human Rights Council resolution 5/1, held its eighth session from 3 to 14 May 2010. The review of Grenada was held at the 11th meeting, on 10 May 2010. The delegation of Grenada was headed by the Minister for Foreign Affairs, The Honourable Peter David. At its 15th meeting, held on 12 May 2010, the Working Group adopted the report on Grenada. 2. On 7 September 2009, the Human Rights Council selected the following group of rapporteurs (troika) to facilitate the review of Grenada: Gabon, Italy and Qatar. 3. In accordance with paragraph 15 of the annex to resolution 5/1, the following documents were issued for the review of Grenada: (a) A national report submitted/written presentation made in accordance with paragraph 15 (a) (A/HRC/WG.6/8/GRD/1); (b) A compilation prepared by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) in accordance with paragraph 15 (b) (A/HRC/WG.6/8/GRD/2); (c) A summary prepared by OHCHR in accordance with paragraph 15 (c) (A/HRC/WG.6/8/GRD/3).  4. A list of questions prepared in advance by Argentina, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Germany, Latvia, the Netherlands, Slovenia and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland was transmitted to Grenada through the troika. Those questions are available on the extranet of the universal periodic review. I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process A. Presentation by the State under review 5. The Minister for Foreign Affairs, Peter David, introduced the national report of Grenada. It was explained that the report had been prepared by a special stakeholder Committee comprising representatives of Government, the Trade Union Council (which is the umbrella body for all trade unions), non-governmental organizations, the Conference of Churches and the local human rights committee set up by the Government of Grenada. The Ministries of Foreign Affairs and Legal Affairs were mandated by the Cabinet as the bodies responsible for the coordination of consultations and the production of the final report. It was added that consultations had continued with relevant Government ministries, social agencies, trade unions and non-governmental organizations throughout Grenada’s preparation for the interactive phase of the universal periodic review. 6. A brief introduction of the geographic and historical background of the country was made. It was emphasized that the country had attained independence in 1974 and that a revolution, with popular support, had taken place in 1979. The revolution had brought about some significant achievements in economic and social development, but some major violations of personal rights had also taken place. Intervention in 1983 by a major Power and regional allies had led to the restoration of democracy and the reintroduction of the Constitution. Five general elections had subsequently taken place. In July 2008, The Honourable Tillman Thomas had led the National Democratic Congress and won 11 of the 15 seats in a generally free and fair election, and was consequently appointed as Prime Minister. The new Administration’s message was good governance, accountability and the rule of law. 7. A general overview of the Constitution and the legislation of Grenada was presented. The Grenada Constitution, which had entered into force in 1974, was the supreme law of Grenada and guaranteed fundamental rights and freedoms. The Constitution also provided that any person alleging that any of its provisions had been breached could apply to the High Court for the enforcement of his or her right. Some of the major laws enacted by Parliament that pertained to human rights were referred to, as was multilateral legislation, including treaties and conventions ratified by Grenada. Examples given included the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer. 8. The structure and the functioning of the various branches of government, including the executive and the judiciary, were then explained. It was stated that overall, the general direction and control of the Government of Grenada were vested in the executive arm of the Government, which was collectively responsible to Parliament. The judiciary in Grenada was part of the Eastern Caribbean Legal System. The Grenadian Constitution and laws provided for an independent judiciary, and the Government respected judicial independence in practice. Final appeal from courts in Grenada lay with the Privy Council of the United Kingdom. 9. It was emphasized that on 5 September 2009, the Government had released the remaining 7 of the original “Grenada 17”, who had been imprisoned for the 1983 murders of then Prime Minister Maurice Bishop and 10 other citizens. Their release had carried out pursuant to a 2007 ruling in a re-sentencing hearing ordered by the Privy Council. 10. Regarding the legislation, it was observed that various laws had been enacted to regulate and address various aspects of citizens’ lives, thus enhancing and guaranteeing individual human rights. Where those laws were inadequate, amendments had also been made to correct those inadequacies and bring about change in society. 11. Some international treaties, conventions and instruments ratified by the Government of Grenada had also been given effect. It was noted, however, that international human rights instruments could not generally be invoked directly before local courts; rather, domestic legislation must first be enacted by the Parliament of Grenada in order to incorporate such instruments into the legal system. 12. Action taken regarding social and economic rights, such as the adoption of policies and programmes and the provision of services, was then described. Policies described were focused on families and children, persons with disabilities, women, education and labour rights. 13. Services mentioned included the Necessitous Fund, to assist children in school; burial of the poor, to assist the disadvantaged in the burial of their loved ones; the Water Support Programme, to ensure that each household had access to clean potable water, and day-care services, to ensure that children between the ages of 6 months and 3 years were cared for while their parents were at work. 14. Regarding families and children, it was highlighted that in 1998, the Child Protection Act had been enacted. The Act was aimed at protecting children from all forms of abuse. A recent review of the Act had revealed the need for provisions for the mandatory reporting of all forms of abuse and the removal of a statutory limitation for sexual offences. 15. Concerning persons with disabilities, it was explained that the Government provided support to the Grenada Council for the Disabled, the vanguard organization for persons living with disabilities. A monthly subvention was provided to assist in the operations of a secretariat. Additionally, financial support, free medical care and housing were provided. 16. Regarding women, the Domestic Violence Act guaranteed the right of women to protection from all forms of abuse. A halfway house for battered women had been established, in which victims of domestic violence and their children were provided with temporary accommodation.   17. Education was mandatory for all children between the ages of 5 and 16, and the Government was committed and endeavoured to ensure equitable access to quality and relevant education for all citizens. 18. As for labour rights, Grenada was a member of the International Labour Organization and was fully committed to ensuring that international labour standards were met, applied and promoted. To that end, core ILO Conventions had been ratified by the Government of Grenada, and international labour standards were well recognized and properly enforced. 19. Regarding good governance, measures taken to combat corruption were described, in particular the enactment in 2007 of the country’s first anti-corruption law and a bill establishing an Integrity Commission. The establishment of an Office of the Ombudsman and the appointment of an Ombudsman to investigate complaints by members of society about the Government’s actions were also mentioned. 20. As for crime prevention, the Government attached significant importance to crime prevention and security. The capacity of the police force to carry out its primary functions of maintaining law and order and preventing crime were always being strengthened, and training in individual human rights and their protection formed a key part of the police training agenda. 21. With regard to health, an efficient health care system had always been the aim of every Government in Grenada. Over the years, successive Governments had faced the challenge of adequately responding to the health-care needs of the population. With respect to housing, the Government agreed that access to proper housing was a basic human right. The Government had struggled to overcome the destruction that had taken place in the wake of Hurricane Ivan, but had since made much progress. 22. Moreover, prison facilities had been improved in order to meet internationally acceptable standards. Measures were being taken to address the growing concerns about overcrowding and other complaints at prisons. Independent human rights groups were permitted to monitor prison conditions and to produce independent reports. 23. Grenada continued to fulfil its obligations through its voluntary pledges and commitments. Its support for activities to promote and protect the human rights of all people, without discrimination of any kind, and to uphold the highest human rights standards at home clearly demonstrated the Government’s philosophy. In supporting the fight to protect human rights internationally, Grenada had ratified core United Nations human rights instruments. However, there was a need for technical support in key areas in order to enhance its ability to continue to do so. 24. Advance questions were then responded to.  25. As regards corporal punishment, it was stated that the use of such punishment existed in the law but was restricted by the 2002 Education Act, which limited its application at schools by restricting its use and allowing parents to request exemptions. As it was permissible under the law, the Government could not prohibit it. Awareness was being raised about concerns over the practice in order to encourage its non-application. 26. As for questions regarding sexual activity between consenting adults of the same sex, it was confirmed that such activity was an offence under the laws of Grenada. However, this could be viewed as discriminatory, as it took away from the freedom of the individual. With the passage of time, growing tolerance on the part of the people would help in addressing this issue. It was a policy issue on which the Cabinet would have to deliberate. It was noted that there was no discrimination in the provision of health and other services in that regard.  27. Regarding questions on human trafficking, it was explained that the Government sought to raise awareness about the issue. The Palermo Protocol on Trafficking had been ratified, and law enforcement officials were undergoing training in the detection and apprehension of human trafficking. In addition, there was an ongoing discussion about the criminalization of the specific offence of human trafficking, although related offences had already been criminalized. In a recent statement at a meeting of the Organization of American States, the Prime Minister pointed to the existence of resource constraints, but indicated that technical assistance would be sought to correct the problem.  28. As to questions on the ratification of the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, it was clarified that it was a possibility, as the Government had undertaken a review of all international treaties with the intention of updating Grenada’s positions on a number of issues.  29. As regards the question relating to the issuance of a standing invitation, it was stated that the Government would consider extending a standing invitation to all the special procedures of the Human Rights Council. 30. As to whether a human rights institution in accordance to the Paris Principles would be established, it was pointed out that Grenada had an independent human rights institution and that attempts were being made to strengthen its capacity with a view to international recognition. The group that had been brought together to help draft the report would be engaged on this issue. 31. Regarding the issue of what progress had been made towards meeting treaty reporting obligations, it was explained that Grenada faced severe human and technical constraints that had resulted in a backlog in its reporting obligations. However, the report to the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women had recently been submitted, and others should follow.  32. In response to questions about progress made in amending legislation to provide boys and girls with equal protection against sexual abuse and exploitation, it was stated that the law provided protection, but the harmonization of legislation in that regard was being contemplated. All reported abuses were investigated, and the Child Welfare Authority worked together with the police.  33. As for what progress had been made in providing juvenile courts and ensuring the separation of children from adults in detention, it was clarified that at present, children were separated from adults in pre-trial detention. With respect to post-trial detention, the Government was working to complete a facility for holding juvenile offenders. The facility had been affected by Hurricane Ivan, so there had been some delays in its functioning. Additionally, the Government was working towards juvenile courts, but it was constrained by limited resources.   34. Regarding violence against women, it was noted that the Domestic Violence Act 2001 and the Domestic Violence Summary Procedure Rules were in place and that their strict enforcement should address the issue. It was also recalled that a shelter for battered women had been established and that all reports of abuse were investigated.  35. Concerning the question about the monitoring of places of detention and whether a complaint mechanism existed for victims of ill treatment, it was explained that regular visits were carried out by non-governmental organizations, in particular through participation in a prison visiting committee. Additionally, there was a Prison Review Board that visited monthly and could receive complaints.  B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review 36. During the interactive dialogue, 28 delegations made statements. A number of delegations thanked the Government for the comprehensive national report, prepared through a broad consultation process, for its comprehensive presentation and for its responses to advance questions. Recommendations made during the dialogue are found in section II of the present report. 37. Algeria congratulated Grenada on having contributed to good governance, accountability and the rule of law. It highlighted the ratification of international human rights instruments, the adoption of the domestic violence and child protection Acts, and the establishment of the Office of the Ombudsman. Algeria appreciated the efforts of the Government to ensure security and crime prevention, as well as the human rights training of the police. It asked for clarification as to why international human rights instruments ratified by Grenada could be invoked directly before local courts. Algeria made recommendations. 38. Brazil inquired about the concrete steps taken by Grenada in guaranteeing the rights of children and women and in combating all forms of discrimination, with special attention to the sexual exploitation of children, violence against women and non-discrimination on the basis of sexual diversity. It also required information about the major steps and shortcomings identified regarding economic, social and cultural rights, with special attention to the gap between rich and poor, policies for migrant workers and refugees, and counter-terrorism measures. It asked about the main urgent needs in the area of human rights cooperation. Brazil made recommendations 39. Slovakia commended the involvement of various stakeholders in the preparation of Grenada’s national report. It welcomed the provision of compulsory and free primary education; the accessibility of pre-school care, as reflected in the high enrolment rate; and the textbook programme established for economically disadvantaged families. It made recommendations.  40. Norway asked how Grenada intended to include civil society in the process of following up on universal periodic review recommendations. It expressed concern about reports regarding the persistence of domestic violence and inquired about the steps Grenada had taken to respond to the need for more formal integration of gender analysis into national policies and plans. Norway made recommendations. 41. Chile thanked Grenada for the presentation of its national report, referring to the measures adopted by the national authorities in various fields to guarantee and improve the protection and the promotion of human rights in the country. Chile made recommendations.  42. Cuba welcomed the priority placed by Grenada on improving the human rights situation of its citizens, including education, health and housing. It congratulated Grenada on the fact that education was compulsory until the age of 16 and was free at the primary and secondary levels, and that Grenada was committed to ensuring that at least one person per household had a university education. It noted the various measures taken to protect the rights of people living with disabilities and welcomed the programmes to provide care for HIV/AIDS sufferers. The prevention strategy in the area of health and the important attention devoted to chronic and communicable diseases were also noted. With respect to the challenges faced in the area of housing since the impact of Hurricane Ivan in 2004, Cuba called on the international community to scale up the financial assistance and cooperation it provided to Grenada to contribute to the full realization of the right to adequate housing. It made recommendations. 43. Spain welcomed Grenada’s commitment to ensuring the right to compulsory and free primary education for all. It noted with satisfaction the existence of a de facto moratorium on the death penalty. Spain made recommendations. 44. Canada recognized the need for comprehensive global and regional efforts to combat human trafficking and was pleased that a training seminar on this issue had recently been hosted by the Department of Public Security of the Anti-trafficking in Persons Unit of the Organization of American States. However, it noted that Grenada did not have legislation to address that important issue. Canada expressed concern about prison overcrowding and the practice of reducing a detainee’s diet as a punishment for violating prison regulations; the delays in the hearing of juvenile cases; the lack of adequate facilities for children in detention; and the limited number of trained personnel to work with such children. Canada made recommendations.  45. The Netherlands acknowledged the economic and social difficulties facing Grenada and encouraged it to seek technical assistance, if necessary. It welcomed the 2007 anti.corruption law, a bill establishing an integrity commission and initiatives taken to raise awareness with regard to violence against women and children, but noted that domestic violence remained a serious problem and that practices of the ill treatment and abuse, including sexual abuse, of children persisted. It noted that the Human Rights Committee had expressed concern that the Criminal Code penalized same-sex activities between consenting adults, which, according to the Committee, violated the right to privacy and non-discrimination. It made recommendations. 46. Mexico encouraged Grenada to maintain a broad consultation process for following up on the universal periodic review outcome. It emphasized the significant progress made in the areas of basic and health services, as well as the high enrolment rates for pre-school and primary education. Mexico commended Grenada for its efforts to guarantee the right to housing, particularly in the context of the country’s vulnerability to natural disasters. It noted the human rights challenges facing Grenada and hoped that the universal periodic review would help to strengthen the national efforts in that area. Mexico made recommendations.  47. The United States of America praised Grenada’s efforts to promote education and develop life skills among Grenada’s youth. However, it remained concerned about the administration of justice and the rule of law and the lack of efficient and effective administration of juvenile justice. The United States expressed its deep concern about the limited definitions in the Criminal Code, which did not include incest, rape or other sexual offences, and about the fact that it did not prohibit the sale and trafficking of children for prostitution and labour exploitation. The United States made recommendations. 48. Uruguay noted the efforts made by Grenada in the promotion and protection of human rights, including the Water Support Programme, aimed at guaranteeing access to drinking water. It noted that Grenada was a party to several international instruments and encouraged it to continue efforts to implement the provisions related to its international commitments at the national level. 49. Argentina thanked Grenada’s for its detailed responses to its written questions and praised the efforts made in the economic, social and cultural spheres. It referred to the provision of primary health care, the high levels of vaccination and school enrolment and the low level of malnutrition.  It also welcomed the existing moratorium on the application of the death penalty. Argentina made recommendations. 50. The Libyan Arab Jamahiriya referred to Grenada’s efforts to improve the human rights situation in the country and noted that it was a party to more than 20 international human rights conventions, which showed the Government’s firm will to protect human rights by respecting its treaty obligations. The Libyan Arab Jamahiriya made recommendations. 51. Australia commended Grenada for its strong tradition of secular governance and freedom of religion. It congratulated Grenada on its continuing reconstruction after the hurricanes of 2009, noting in particular the impressive work carried out to rebuild damaged education facilities. It welcomed the de facto moratorium on the death penalty but regretted the fact that Grenada had not formally abolished it. It noted with concern that Grenada had maintained criminal sanctions against sexual activity between consenting adults of the same sex. Australia made recommendations. 52. France noted the launching of a new youth policy and posed questions in that regard. It also noted that Grenada had already applied a de facto moratorium on the death penalty and established several institutions to guarantee human rights. It highlighted the finding of the Human Rights Committee that Grenada continued to punish homosexuality under article 435 of its Criminal Code, which deemed sexual activities against nature a crime. It made recommendations. 53. Germany requested more detailed information about measures taken by the Government of Grenada to reduce domestic violence, particularly with regard to adequate training of the police and other officials dealing with such situations. Germany made recommendations. 54. Slovenia thanked Grenada for its answers to its advance questions regarding the independent national human rights institution. In line with the report of the Human Rights Committee for 2007, it noted with satisfaction that a de facto moratorium on the death penalty was in force, although it remained concerned that there were still at least 10 persons on death row. It also stressed that domestic law exceptionally allowed for the detention of juveniles together with adults, which allegedly had become a regular practice. Slovenia made recommendations. 55. Regarding questions raised with respect to trafficking, the explanation given during the introduction of the report was recalled. 56. As for seeking assistance in the implementation of international obligations, it was stated that the Government would certainly consider this, as it would welcome technical assistance, in particular regarding the issue of treaty ratification. 57. As for questions raised regarding the death penalty, it was recalled that there was a de facto moratorium on the death penalty in Grenada. The death penalty was no longer mandatory, as stipulated in the 2006 decision of the Privy Council. While it remained in the law, it had not been applied for decades.  58. With respect to the issue of prison overcrowding, it was stated that the Government was considering the possibility of building a new prison, as the present facility was not adequate. 59. Concerning the issue of raising the minimum age of criminal responsibility, it was noted that this was an issue of great concern and that progress was expected shortly. 60. Hungary thanked Grenada for its cooperation and participation in the universal periodic review process and commended the country for efforts made in the promotion and protection of human rights despite its difficult situation and limited resources. It made recommendations.  61. The United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland acknowledged Grenada’s vulnerability to natural disasters and the devastating effects that these could have on infrastructure and livelihoods. It encouraged the Government, in planning for such events, to do all that it could to ensure the protection of human rights during such crises. It also encouraged the Government to abolish the death penalty under all circumstances. It inquired about Grenada’s plans to ensure effective civil society involvement in the follow-up to the review. The United Kingdom made recommendations. 62. China noted that Grenada had enacted a number of laws containing provisions for human rights protection and promotion and had taken measures to upgrade the housing for vulnerable groups and to increase job opportunities. It noted that Grenada had given top priority to human resources, health and the prevention and punishment of crimes. It also noted Grenada's efforts to ensure equal enjoyment of the right to education and its efforts in the area of economic, social and cultural rights. China recognized the difficulties and challenges that Grenada faced as a developing country in promoting and protecting human rights, in particular, the difficulties in improving prison facilities and reintegrating AIDS patients and disabled persons. China called on the international community to provide the necessary assistance and to support Grenada in these areas. It made one recommendation. 63. Maldives welcomed the establishment of numerous governmental and non.governmental institutions to promote and protect human rights, including the National Organization for Women and the National Coalition on the Rights of the Child. It commended Grenada’s commitment to the education of all its citizens and the implementation of measures to ensure that formal education was free and mandatory. Maldives referred to shortcomings in the Child Protection Act. It made a recommendation. 64. Latvia noted that Grenada had established a free compulsory education system for all children between the ages of 5 and 16 and that a national school textbook programme ensured that all children were provided with the basic textbooks required to enhance their educational opportunities. Latvia made a recommendation. 65. Jamaica noted that it had a great appreciation for the sterling efforts that Grenada had made to protect and promote human rights. It noted the social programmes that the Government had introduced to improve the living standards of vulnerable groups and disadvantaged members of society, so as to enhance their socio-economic rights. Jamaica made a recommendation 66. Trinidad and Tobago noted that Grenada was a small, resource-deficient developing country facing challenges in satisfying the full range of the social, economic, environmental and other demands of its population. It stressed that there were obvious capacity issues hindering the country’s overall development and the implementation of its international human rights obligations. It referred to the hurricane of September 2004 and the magnitude of the task required to put Grenada back on its feet. It welcomed Grenada’s policy aimed at a review of the age of criminal responsibility, which was currently 7 years; the expansion of legal aid to include persons charged with a serious criminal offence; the adoption of legislation to guarantee the legal protection of children born out of wedlock; and the integration of children with disabilities into the educational system.   67. Ghana commended Grenada for the measures it had put in place to ensure the enjoyment of human rights, such as the Domestic Violence Act, programmes to ensure equitable access to quality and relevant education for all citizens, and the Necessitous Fund, which provided additional support to ensure that students remained in school. It noted the number of services aimed at alleviating poverty and improving the living standards of disabled, vulnerable and disadvantaged members of society, thus enhancing their socio.economic rights. It commended the Government for its commitment to the principles underlying good governance and supported its request for technical support in key areas to enable it to fulfil its obligations regarding the signing and ratification of international instruments. It made a recommendation. 68. Nicaragua noted Grenada’s actions to promote and protect human rights. It added that Grenada had accomplished achievements in the social and economic spheres despite the fact that it had a small economy and had to address the current crises. Nicaragua noted the social programmes to address the effects of poverty and referred to the public assistance and drinking water programmes as good practices. It encouraged Grenada to value the universal periodic review so as to strengthen its framework for the promotion and protection of human rights. Nicaragua made recommendations 69. South Africa inquired about the extent to which civil society had been consulted and involved in the process of drafting the national report, as well as about its involvement in the follow-up process. As a local human rights committee had been established for the preparation of Grenada’s report, South Africa inquired whether that had been an initial step in setting up a national human rights institution in line with the Paris Principles. It also requested further information about what steps were being taken to increase the representation of women in the decision-making spheres of government and to implement the recommendations of the Committee on the Rights of the Child. South Africa made recommendations. 70. In conclusion, appreciation was expressed for the assistance received from several countries after Hurricane Ivan. Deep appreciation was also expressed to countries that had provided Grenada with technical support with a view to addressing a number of issues that had been raised during the meeting. Finally, the Minister for Foreign Affairs thanked all delegations for their remarks and assured them that the Government would consider the recommendations made. He also assured the Working Group that Granada would do all in its power to abide by its international obligations. II. Conclusions and/or recommendations 71. The following recommendations will be examined by Grenada, which will provide responses in due course, but no later than the fifteenth session of the Human Rights Council, in September 2010: 71.1. Consider ratifying other human rights core instruments, namely, the Convention against Torture, the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of their Families, and the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (Algeria); 71.2. Consider ratifying the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination (Brazil); Consider ratifying the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (Brazil); Consider ratifying  the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, as well as the Optional Protocols thereto (Brazil); Consider ratifying the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance (Brazil); Consider ratifying the First and Second Optional Protocols to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (Brazil); Consider ratifying the Protocols to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (Brazil); Consider ratifying the Protocols to the Convention on the Rights of the Child (Brazil); Consider ratifying the Rome Statute (Brazil); accede to the Conventions on refugees and stateless persons (Brazil); accomplish the human rights goals set out in Human Rights Council resolution 9/12 (Brazil); 71.3. Ratify pending core international human rights instruments, notably the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, and the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, as well as the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court, including accession to the Agreement on Privileges and Immunities (Slovakia); 71.4. Ratify the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment and the Optional Protocol thereto; ratify the First and Second Optional Protocols to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance (Chile); 71.5. Intensify efforts to cooperate with the international human rights system by signing and ratifying the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights; the Optional Protocol to the Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (Spain); Sign and ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women; Sign and ratify the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment and the Optional Protocol thereto (Spain); Sign and ratify the two Optional Protocols to the Convention on the Rights of the Child (Spain); Sign and ratify the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and the Optional Protocol thereto (Spain); ratify the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance (Spain); 71.6. Sign and ratify the following international instruments: the Optional Protocols to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (Argentina); Sign and ratify the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination (Argentina); Sign and ratify the Convention against Torture and the Optional Protocol thereto (Argentina); Sign and ratify the Optional Protocols of the Convention on the Rights of the Child (Argentina); Sign and ratify the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and the Optional Protocol thereto (Argentina); Sign and ratify the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance (Argentina); 71.7. Sign, ratify or accede to the main international human rights instruments, in particular the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance, the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Economic and Social Rights, and the Rome Statute (Uruguay); 71.8. Consider signing all core outstanding international human rights instruments and enacting the domestic legislation necessary to domesticate the provisions of these instruments (South Africa); 71.9. Ratify, as soon as possible, the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance (France); 71.10. Accede to the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court (Netherlands); 71.11. In line with the Government’s commitment to the rights of persons with disabilities, adhere to the principles set out in the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and favourably consider its ratification as soon as possible (Mexico); 71.12. Consider actively acceding to the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (China); 71.13. Pursue efforts to honour its commitments under the international human rights conventions to which it is a party, so as to ensure the protection of these rights (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya); 71.14. Accede to the international conventions and treaties to which it is not yet a party, and establish a national human rights institution in conformity with the Paris Principles (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya); 71.15. Harmonize national legislation with international conventions so as to ensure that its citizens enjoy the human rights set out in such legislation and those conventions, and give international conventions precedence over national legislation (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya); 71.16. Continue to work to review its domestic legal framework in order to harmonize it with international norms to which Grenada is a party (Nicaragua); 71.17. Work to ensure that its legislation conforms with international human rights laws, and seek the assistance of the international community where necessary (United Kingdom); 71.18. Request cooperation and technical assistance from the international community, including from relevant international bodies, with a view to strengthening national capacities to ratify and implement international conventions to which it is not yet a party, as well as submit pending reports to the human rights treaty bodies (Mexico); 71.19. Significantly improve its cooperation with the United Nations treaty bodies by agreeing on timelines for the submission of overdue reports, and consider the need for external assistance to that end (Norway); 71.20. Submit all pending reports to the respective United Nations treaty bodies, namely, the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, the Human Rights Committee and the Committee on the Rights of the Child (Slovenia); 71.21. Regularly fulfil its reporting obligations to the treaty bodies of the human rights treaties to which it is a party (Nicaragua); 71.22. Submit its report under the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights as soon as possible, seeking technical support, if necessary (Netherlands); 71.23. Consider issuing a standing invitation to United Nations human rights special procedures (Brazil); 71.24. Extend a standing invitation to all special procedures of the Human Rights Council (Latvia); 71.25. Extend an open and standing invitation to the United Nations special procedures mandate holders (Chile); 71.26. Extend an open and standing invitation to all the special procedures (Spain); 71.27. Extend an open invitation to the United Nations special procedures (United Kingdom); 71.28. Establish an effective and inclusive process to follow up on universal periodic review recommendations (Norway); 71.29. Consider establishing a national human rights institution (Algeria); 71.30. Consider setting up a national human rights institution in line with the Paris Principles (South Africa); 71.31. Harmonize its national human rights institution so that it is in conformity with the Paris Principles (Spain); 71.32. Establish an independent national human rights institution in conformity with the Paris Principles (France); 71.33. Establish an independent national human rights institution, in accordance with the Paris Principles (Germany); 71.34. Accredit a national human rights institution in accordance with the Paris Principles (Hungary); 71.35. Create, as soon as possible, an ombudsman in accordance with the Paris Principles (Nicaragua); 71.36. Continue to adopt measures and programmes to eliminate discrimination against women, especially in the workplace (Chile); 71.37. Ensure that training in gender analysis is conducted and that a gender policy is implemented (Norway); 71.38. Amend the relevant legislation with a view to abolishing capital punishment, in line with General Assembly resolutions 62/149 and 63/168 and the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, and commute existing death sentences to terms of imprisonment (Slovakia); 71.39. Abolish the death penalty for all crimes, and sign and ratify the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (Spain); 71.40. Accede to the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, aimed at abolishing the death penalty, and take the necessary steps to remove the death penalty from Grenada’s justice system (Australia); 71.41. Adopt, as soon as possible, a de jure moratorium on the death penalty with a view to its definitive abolition, and accede to the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, which prohibits the death penalty in all circumstances (France); 71.42. Establish a moratorium on executions with a view to abolishing the death penalty (Brazil); 71.43. In the light of the moratorium on the application of the death penalty, take appropriate measures with a view to its abolition (Uruguay); 71.44. Consider formally abolishing the death penalty (Slovenia); 71.45. Formally abolish the death penalty (Germany); 71.46. Abolish the death penalty (United Kingdom); 71.47. Definitively abolish the death penalty in its domestic legislation (Argentina); 71.48. Abolish the death penalty completely and, in the meantime, establish a formal moratorium on executions, as urged by the respective General Assembly resolutions (Hungary); 71.49. Further strengthen the programmes aimed at preventing crime and ensuring the security of citizens (Algeria); 71.50. Undertake a comprehensive review of prison conditions to ensure that all detainees are treated humanely and in compliance with international standards (Canada); 71.51. Take steps in order to alleviate the scale of overcrowding in prisons and improve the conditions of those detained (Hungary); 71.52. Alleviate overcrowding in prisons by encouraging alternative sentences to incarceration where appropriate (Canada); 71.53. Review prison regulations to prohibit the reduction of diet as a form of punishment (Canada); 71.54. Ensure that juveniles are detained separately from adults, without exception (Slovenia); 71.55. Raise the minimum age of criminal responsibility to an acceptable level, in compliance with international standards (Slovakia); 71.56. Take the appropriate measures to implement a separate juvenile justice system, and consider providing separate detention facilities for minor cases in appropriate cases (United States); 71.57. Take steps to implement a juvenile justice system, and introduce training programmes for all personnel involved in working with children in jail (Canada); 71.58. Strengthen the protection framework for children’s rights, particularly through measures to prevent child abuse, exploitation and violence against children; review the juvenile justice system in order to raise the age of criminal responsibility, in accordance with international standards; and continue its efforts to guarantee the separation of minors from adults in detention facilities (Mexico); 71.59. Strengthen its policy for the full guarantee of the rights of the child, with attention to the implementation of the Guidelines for the Alternative Care of Children, according to resolution 11/7 of the Human Rights Council and resolution 64/142 of the General Assembly (Brazil); 71.60. Establish an independent complaints mechanism for children in alternative care institutions (Slovakia); 71.61. Abolish provisions in its domestic legislation that authorize the corporal punishment of children in all places, in particular in detention facilities and in schools (France); 71.62. Adopt a law that prohibits corporal punishment against children in all areas of life (Uruguay); 71.63. Enhance the programmes aimed at protecting children from all forms of abuse (Algeria); 71.64. Amend the Criminal Code to ensure equal protection of boys and girls from all forms of sexual abuse and exploitation as well as to eliminate corporal punishment provisions from existing laws and to prohibit the use of corporal punishment in places of detention and in schools (Germany); 71.65. Adopt and implement the measures necessary to prevent abuses, namely, the ill treatment and abuse of children, including sexual abuse, as referred to by the Committee on the Rights of the Child, and ensure that such abuses are properly prosecuted within a child-friendly judicial procedure, including appropriate reintegration and rehabilitation schemes for victims, regardless of their sex (Slovakia); 71.66. Amend or regulate existing laws and approve the measures necessary to guarantee to boys, girls and adolescents effective and fair protection, especially from the point of view of gender, against sexual abuse and against exploitation in general (Uruguay); 71.67. Amend the Criminal Code to include equal protection of girls and boys from all forms of sexual abuse and exploitation (United States); 71.68. Ensure equal protection of girls and boys from all forms of sexual abuse and exploitation (Norway); 71.69. Take all measures necessary to bring its domestic law into conformity with the Convention on the Rights of the Child and to adopt provisions in its Criminal Code to also protect boys against sexual exploitation (France); 71.70. Ensure that the rights of all children are equally protected under domestic law, regardless of gender, and consider implementing the recommendations of the Committee on the Rights of the Child (South Africa); 71.71. Strengthen action to prevent and combat ill treatment and abuse, including the sexual abuse of children, and take into account the recommendations of the Committee on the Rights of the Child (Netherlands); 71.72. Address efficiently and effectively the need for provisions for the mandatory reporting of all forms of abuse and the removal of a statutory limitation for sexual offences (Maldives); 71.73. Participate fully in the development and implementation of the regional Strategic Plan for Building Abuse-free Childhoods, referenced in the UNICEF report (Canada); 71.74. Regarding recommendations made by the Human Rights Committee that action be taken to raise the age of criminal responsibility to an acceptable level under international standards, and to reduce domestic violence, take action to address these concerns if they have not been fully addressed (Ghana); 71.75. Increase efforts to prevent domestic violence and, inter alia, to strengthen action to assist victims, and take into account the recommendations of the Human Rights Committee (Netherlands); 71.76. Increase its efforts to reduce domestic violence, ensure that police and other officials dealing with situations of domestic violence are adequately trained, and adopt measures to sensitize the public on gender issues (Norway); 71.77. Undertake concerted efforts to address the issue of domestic violence, especially with regard to its prevention (Germany); 71.78. Take adequate measures to train the police and other officials who deal with the issue of domestic violence (Germany); 71.79. Adopt legislation to ensure that human trafficking is prohibited under its Criminal Code (Canada); 71.80. Take the necessary measures to prohibit the sale and trafficking of children for prostitution or labour exploitation, and adopt a policy to confront the issue of trafficking and exploitation (United States); 71.81. Harmonize the provisions of its domestic law on the punishment and prevention of human trafficking with the international instruments ratified by Grenada (Argentina); 71.82. Adopt legislation to eliminate discrimination based on sexual orientation, and decriminalize sexual relations between consenting adults of the same sex (Chile); 71.83. Decriminalize sexual relations between consenting adults of the same sex, and carry out legislative and administrative measures prohibiting discrimination based on sexual orientation, especially with regard to access to employment, education and housing (Spain); 71.84. Decriminalize sexual activity between consenting adults of the same sex (Netherlands); 71.85. Decriminalize homosexuality by abrogating the criminal provision prohibiting sexual relations between consenting adults of the same sex, and subscribe to the General Assembly Declaration of December 2008 on human rights and sexual orientation (France); 71.86. Remove legislation which discriminates against individuals on the basis of their sexual orientation or gender identity (Australia); 71.87. Strengthen ongoing programmes aimed at the achievement of universal secondary education (Cuba); 71.88. Continue the implementation of programmes aimed at achieving a national health-care system that responds adequately to the needs of the population (Cuba); 71.89. Develop comprehensive policies and programmes to reduce the incidence of infant and maternal mortality (Germany); 71.90. Make all possible efforts to prevent the spread of HIV/AIDS, and request technical and financial assistance from the United Nations and the relevant international organizations, including the World Health Organization, in order to achieve this goal and overcome this obstacle (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya); 71.91. Work to develop a technical assistance plan to strengthen its public policies, and present the plan to the donor community for its support (Nicaragua); 71.92. Seek the assistance of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to facilitate Grenada’s request for technical assistance so that it may better fulfil its reporting obligations under the respective human rights instruments to which it is a party (Jamaica). 72.All conclusions and/or recommendations contained in the present report reflect the position of the submitting State(s) and/or the State under review. They should not be construed as endorsed by the Working Group as a whole. Annex Composition of the delegation The delegation of Grenada was headed by the Minister for Foreign Affairs, The Honourable Peter David, and was composed of the following members: • Mr. Stephen Fletcher, Ambassador to the European Union, Brussels; • Mr. Adekunle Adebayo Olowu, Crown Counsel. 