Distr.: General 11 July 2011 Original: English General Assembly Human Rights Council Eighteenth session Agenda item 6 Universal Periodic Review Report of the Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review* Hungary * The annex to the present report is circulated as received. Contents Paragraphs Page Introduction ............................................................................................................... 1–4 3 
I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process................................................. 5–93 3 
A. Presentation by the State under review ............................................................ 5–28 3 
B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review ........................ 29–93 6 
II. Conclusions and/or recommendations...................................................................... 94–97 13  Annex Composition of the delegation ............................................................................................................ 23 Introduction 1. The Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review (UPR), established in accordance with Human Rights Council resolution 5/1 of 18 June 2007, held its eleventh session from 2 to 13 May 2011. The review of Hungary was held at the 15th meeting on 11 May 2011. The delegation of Hungary was headed by Zoltan Balog, Minister of State for Social Inclusion, Ministry of Public Administration and Justice. At its 17th meeting, held on 13 May 2011, the Working Group adopted the report on Hungary. 2. On 21 June 2010, the Human Rights Council selected the following group of rapporteurs (troika) to facilitate the review of Hungary: France, Gabon, Ukraine. 3. In accordance with paragraph 15 of the annex to resolution 5/1, the following documents were issued for the review of Hungary: (a) A national report submitted/written presentation made in accordance with paragraph 15 (a) (A/HRC/WG.6/11/HUN/1); (b) A compilation prepared by OHCHR in accordance with paragraph 15 (b) (A/HRC/WG.6/11/HUN/2); (c) A summary prepared by OHCHR in accordance with paragraph 15 (c) (A/HRC/WG.6/11/HUN/3). 4. A list of questions prepared in advance by Belgium, the Czech Republic, Denmark, the Netherlands, Norway, Slovenia, Sweden. Switzerland and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland was transmitted to Hungary through the troika. These questions are available on the extranet of the UPR. I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process A. Presentation by the State under review 5. The delegation expressed its conviction that Hungary’s first universal periodic review and the follow-up would further strengthen its human rights record.  The delegation reported that a wide range of civil-society representatives were consulted with during the national report preparation. 6. Hungary had launched a series of international conferences in 2008, called the Budapest Human Rights Forum, which covered a range of human rights issues. During the 3rd Forum in 2010, the Deed of the Foundation for the International Prevention of Genocide and Mass Atrocities was signed by the Central European University and the Gáspár Károli University of the Hungarian Reformed Church. 7. The delegation noted that the adoption of a new Constitution by the Parliament in April 2011 represented a milestone for the development of the rule of law and marked the end of the transitional period from dictatorship to democracy. The new Constitution strengthened the protection of human rights inspired by the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union and contained a more extensive list of rights than before. The new Constitution stipulated that marriage was an institution between a man and a woman, however the rights of same-sex couples in a registered partnership were protected to the same extent as those of heterosexual couples. The new Constitution also strengthened and widened the function of the Constitutional Court by introducing the constitutional right to launch a complaint before it by individuals. 8. The delegation informed about Hungary’s willingness to accede to the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture (OP-CAT) as a part of its pledges to the Human Rights Council as well as about the Government’s steps to prepare this ratification. 9. Hungary supported the preservation and further development of cultural rights and values of the13 national and ethnic minorities recognized in the country and strived to broaden the cultural autonomy of the minorities by providing the necessary legal, institutional and budgetary framework. Minority self-governments were entitled to have minority-run and State-subsidized institutions. 10. Since the establishment of a democratic system, Hungary had been addressing the special situation of the Roma through laws and other measures to improve their socio.economic situation, while remaining committed to the elimination of discrimination against them. At the same time the delegation acknowledged that the situation of the Roma and other socially disadvantaged groups had not significantly improved but rather had worsened, especially in the area of employment.  Hungary joined the Roma Decade Programme and was in the process of developing a Roma Programme for implementation. 11. Hungary had taken measures and implemented several programmes that covered 1,800 education institutions, were supported by a budget of about US$ 40 million and aimed, inter alia, to fight segregation, ensure access to quality and inclusive education and decrease school dropout. 12. In 2008, Hungary launched a development programme for the 33 most disadvantaged micro-regions with a budget of US$ 545 million to remedy deficiencies in its social and economic infrastructure and improve the quality of local services. Regarding employment issues, the delegation reported on the provision of training programmes and access to professional consulting services and information about potential employers for those seeking employment. To end segregation, in the period of 2005-2009 Hungary implemented settlement programmes with a budget of about US$ 20 million, which resulted in the improvement of living conditions for hundreds of families. 13. In recent years, extremist groups had re-emerged with a demand to maintain public order in Roma-populated areas, resulting in social and ethnic unrest. Among several steps taken to address the situation, Hungary amended the relevant legislation to effectively prosecute and punish these extremist groups. 14. Hungary guaranteed the enjoyment of human rights in the field of health care and provided a legal basis for the protection of the dignity, autonomy and rights of patients.  To guarantee the rights of women, the legislation provided a possibility for women to give birth outside the hospital system by legally setting necessary requirements and conditions. 15. In 2007, the Parliament accepted the “Let it be better for the children” – National strategy 2007-2032 with the goal of decreasing child poverty and improving opportunities for children. 16. In 2010, Hungary adopted the Media Law to replace the Media Act. The Government had worked, inter alia, with United Nations Special Rapporteurs on this issue and incorporated suggestions for amendments made by the European Commission. The delegation noted that this media regulation provided a balance between freedom of expression and other relevant fundamental rights. At the same time, Hungary welcomed the initiative to hold a general debate on the role of the European Union in the area of media regulation and, as part of this debate, every regulation in EU member States would be reviewed in order to correct the deficiencies of the normative framework on the media. 17. As to the issue of the independence and impartiality of the Media Council, the delegation explained that a number of legal guarantees existed to ensure its independence, including the fact that the Council was comprised of professionals elected by a two-thirds majority of the National Assembly, and that Council members were required to have no political party affiliation and were not to accept instructions from anyone. 18. Regarding the questions on hate crimes, the delegation stated that cases of violent acts motivated by racism and xenophobia were punishable by the Criminal Code and racist motivation constituted an aggravating circumstance for several other crimes.  Victims of racially motivated crimes were entitled to State assistance. 19. The delegation stated that the domestic legislation on equal treatment and the promotion of equal opportunities defined and prohibited direct discrimination as well as prohibited indirect discrimination. The Constitution and legislation also provided guarantees for equal treatment and several legal remedies in case of discrimination. Furthermore, the Equal Treatment Authority was responsible for the investigation of complaints about discrimination. 20. Any act that might appear as “domestic violence” was already covered by the existing crimes and offences provided for in the Criminal Code. Since such violent acts did not differ, whether committed against a member of the family or against a third person, it was believed that there was no need to have domestic violence defined as a separate crime to avoid duplication in the Code. 21. In response to questions regarding the national human rights institutions the delegation reported that the application process for the accreditation of the office of the Parliamentary Commission by the International Coordinating Committee had started. 22. While reporting on the initiative to adopt a new Criminal Code in 2011, the delegation gave assurances that due attention would be given to ensure that the new Code include a definition of torture in line with the requirements of the Convention against Torture. 23. The delegation reported that detention of a person entering the country illegally was not ordered as a punishment for illegal border-crossing but rather it might be necessary to ensure the implementation of expulsion.  The detention should be immediately terminated when the person concerned is granted international protection and the purpose of detention no longer existed. The legality of the detention was ensured by continuous judicial control. Additionally, the person concerned could appeal this decision. 24. In response to questions on the right to health and the preventive health care system, the delegation reported on the age-based screening programme for citizens within the framework of the National Public Health Programme, which included, inter alia, mammography, cytology, and colonoscopy. 25. Regarding the steps to combat torture, the delegation explained that the Criminal Code provided for the crimes of ill-treatment and forced interrogation and it penalized the indirect commission of such crimes. Moreover, an Independent Police Complaints Board, which consisted of independent experts, was established in 2008 to examine alleged violations of fundamental rights by the police. 26. The domestic legislation ensured the principle of non-refoulement and the relevant authorities were required to verify whether the principle of non-refoulement was respected before the implementation of a decision on return. The person concerned was also entitled to request a remedy against the decision on return before a court. 27. As to measures to combat human trafficking, the delegation reported that human trafficking was criminalized and forced labour linked to trafficking was addressed by the legal provisions on human trafficking. Hungary had established excellent cooperation with Switzerland, Italy and Romania and also established a national coordination mechanism to effectively combat human trafficking. 28. The delegation reported that the periodic report to the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination was already prepared and would be submitted soon to that treaty body. B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review 29. During the interactive dialogue, 48 delegations made statements. A number of countries recognized Hungary’s openness to international scrutiny and its willingness to make further progress on human rights. A number of countries thanked Hungary for preparing a comprehensive national report involving a wide spectrum of Government departments, experts and civil society stakeholders. Recommendations made during the dialogue are to be found in section II of the present report. 30. India noted concerns regarding the persistent discrimination against the Roma people with respect to education, health, employment and housing, and the disproportionately high levels of poverty among them.  India inquired about the effectiveness of the Programme for the Decade of Roma Inclusion 2005-15 and any progress achieved in the implementation of the European Roma Strategy.  India made a recommendation. 31. France noted that Hungary is party to most core human rights instruments. France observed that the new constitution did not explicitly prohibit the death penalty and discrimination on grounds of sexual orientation and inquired whether legislation protecting against such discrimination was envisaged. France noted that Roma had been victims of racist acts and intimidation by extremists and inquired on measures envisaged to protect them. France made recommendations. 32. Switzerland, observing that victims of racist attacks often belonged to ethnic minorities or vulnerable groups, underlined that recent violence against Roma committed by right-wing militia was unacceptable. Switzerland emphasized the prohibition of all forms of discrimination, the respect for the principle of non-refoulement and for the freedom of expression, thus of the press, to be guaranteed by national legislation. Switzerland made recommendations. 33. Indonesia commended Hungary for its efforts to promote real equality between women and men through the adoption of the National Strategy for the Promotion of Gender Equality --Guidelines and Goals 2010-2021. Indonesia appreciated Hungary’s efforts to combat discrimination and the work undertaken to enact legislation on hate crimes and to protect the interests of Roma.  Indonesia made recommendations. 34. The Russian Federation referred to the concerns expressed by the treaty bodies and special procedures about the increase in anti-Semitism, cases of torture by police against national minorities and non-citizens, discrimination and segregation against the Roma. It made recommendations. 35. Ecuador noted broad internal debate and consultation with civil society in the preparation of the national report. It hoped that the implementation of the newly adopted Constitution would be in accordance with Hungary’s international obligations. It welcomed the information provided on measures taken for social and economic inclusion of the Roma population. It noted that these measures could constitute an important step for the improvement of the human rights situation of this minority. It made recommendations. 36. Algeria welcomed the Budapest Human Rights Forum, efforts to protect women and children, integrate minorities and for equality of treatment and opportunity. It sought information on the recent media law and the right to health. Algeria noted concerns about International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights provisions not being directly applicable in court, disabled rights and insufficient resources and mandate insecurity of the Equality of Treatment Authority and the national mechanism for the protection of women. Algeria made recommendations. 37. Slovenia appreciated the level of constitutional and legal provision for the protection of national minorities; however their actual implementation could be improved. Slovenia was concerned over Hungary’s seemingly inconsistent internal and external minority policy and over decreasing financial support to bilingual schools and national minority institutions in Hungary.  It made recommendations. 38. Pakistan noted the approval of the new Constitution and inquired how Hungary intended to build national consensus on it. While acknowledging the important role played by the Equal Treatment Authority in addressing grievances of discrimination, Pakistan noted with grave concern that Roma people were discriminated against and, at times, segregated in schools, housing, public places and health-care services.  Pakistan made recommendations. 39. Poland commended Hungary for the creation of the Foundation for the International Prevention of Genocide and Mass Atrocities. Poland appreciated Hungary’s commitment to cooperate with the special procedures and OHCHR. It welcomed the information that Hungary would accede to OP-CAT.  Poland encouraged Hungary to address the problems of refugees and foreigners by creating conditions for their integration into society. Poland made recommendations. 40. The Islamic Republic of Iran expressed concern at the situation of minorities, especially the Roma, particularly its women and girls, the profiling of Roma by the police, excessive use of force and ill-treatment by law enforcement officials, the disproportionate number of Roma children in the juvenile justice system, persistent reports of trafficking of women and girls, the number of child victims of family violence and sexual abuse and the lack of adequate prevention and reintegration measures. It made recommendations. 41. The Czech Republic welcomed Hungary’s commitments to the Human Rights Council. It remained concerned about the prolonged periods of administrative detention of asylum-seekers. It was concerned about recent attacks against the Roma population and supported the Government in taking necessary measures to ensure that all cases of racially motivated violence are effectively investigated and perpetrators prosecuted and punished. It made recommendations. 42. Honduras recognized Hungary’s efforts for human rights, in particular the “Budapest Human Rights Forum” which has achieved concrete results such as the Foundation for the International Prevention of Genocide and Mass Atrocities. It was concerned over gender violence and the lack of legislation prohibiting domestic violence and marital rape. It was also concerned over human trafficking. It made recommendations. 43. China commended Hungary’s efforts to promote gender equality and to protect the rights of vulnerable groups such as women, children and persons with disabilities. China noted that the Roma still faced some degree of discrimination in areas such as employment, housing and education and wished to know about the measures planned to continue improving the living conditions for the Roma. 44. Greece referred to Hungary’s founding of the Foundation for the International Prevention of Genocide and Mass Atrocities and holding of the annual Budapest Human Rights Forum. Greece inquired about measures intended to tackle issues relating to access to education of Roma children, inequalities faced by women and combating hate speech and discrimination. Greece made recommendations. 45. Slovakia asked whether Hungary planned, in implementing article D of the new Constitution, to be guided by the relevant international law, stipulating that it was the responsibility of the State where a national minority resided to support and protect that national minority. Slovakia also asked whether Hungary was going to take on board a necessity of a genuine link between the State concerned and an individual to be granted its citizenship with regards to the new Hungarian citizenship legislation. 46. Azerbaijan noted that the Foundation for the International Prevention of Genocide and Mass Atrocities will complement early warning and action efforts of international entities and requested further information on this subject. Azerbaijan commended the adoption of a national strategy for the promotion of gender equality. Azerbaijan made recommendations.  47. Brazil noted that despite efforts to integrate the Roma, it was reported that discrimination, exclusion and anti-Roma prejudice remained a major concern.  Brazil noted that the situation of asylum-seekers and irregular migrants deserved to be addressed as a matter of priority. Brazil referred to concerns expressed regarding the new Constitution and media legislation and asked if the Government was considering revising the media legislation in the light of those concerns. Brazil made recommendations. 48. The Republic of Moldova commended Hungary’s standing invitation for special procedures, its continuous voluntary contributions to OHCHR, the holding of several Budapest Human Rights Forums, the National Strategy for the Promotion of Gender Equality and progress in combating trafficking in human beings, including children. It made recommendations. 49. Austria welcomed the steps taken to address the issues facing the Roma minority at the national and the EU levels during the Hungarian Presidency. It noted that anti-Roma prejudices were openly voiced by a party represented in Parliament. Austria asked about the additional steps planned by the Government to improve the situation of the Roma, including on issues related to detention. It shared some of the concerns about the recently enacted media laws. Austria made recommendations. 50. Thailand commended Hungary’s strong commitment to human rights and welcomed its establishment of the Foundation for the International Prevention of Genocide and Mass Atrocities. Thailand noted Hungary’s serious efforts to deal with specific challenges and its national and regional initiatives for the Roma.  Thailand made recommendations. 51. Uzbekistan noted the adoption of specific laws and administrative measures to promote and protect human rights. It referred to the concerns expressed by treaty bodies about cases of torture by law enforcement officials in penitentiary institutions and the low number of investigations and convictions in this connection; torture against members of national minorities in detention, and the use of corporal punishment in schools. Uzbekistan made recommendations. 52. Finland noted the financial incentives provided to local authorities to assist in the de.segregation of schools, yet Roma children were still placed unnecessarily in special schools for children with mental disabilities or in separate substandard classes within schools. Finland noted a lack of specific legislation proscribing domestic violence and spousal rape and reports of gender-based violence against women and spousal rape without legal consequences. Finland made recommendations. 53. The Republic of Korea recognized Hungary’s efforts in the promotion of human rights and democracy such as the holding of the annual Budapest Human Rights Forum and the recent establishment of the Foundation for the International Prevention of Genocide and Mass Atrocities. It encouraged Hungary to further bring its national system in conformity with international standards. It made recommendations. 54. Australia encouraged Hungary to establish a national human rights institution in full accordance with the Paris Principles. It also encouraged Hungary to ensure full conformity of the new media law with its international human rights obligations. Australia was concerned that the Romani had been subject to racially motivated violence and still faced discrimination. It encouraged Hungary to continue promoting the inclusion of the Romani people. Australia made recommendations. 55. Egypt noted the establishment of the Foundation for the International Prevention of Genocide and Mass Atrocities and looked forward to its effective functioning and contribution to prevention efforts. Egypt wished to be apprised of steps taken to implement the National Strategy for the Promotion of Gender Equality and referred to concerns raised over the lack of data and reports of trafficking of women and girls for the purposes of sexual exploitation and domestic servitude. Egypt made recommendations. 56. Belarus noted with satisfaction that Hungary was party to the majority of the core international human rights treaties. At the same time, it noted a need for Hungary to improve its reporting to the treaty bodies and to show more active involvement in the preparation of thematic reports of the special procedures. While noting the decrease in cases of human trafficking in the national report, Belarus asked about ongoing strategies that Hungary implemented to combat human trafficking. It made recommendations. 57. Norway recognized Hungary’s efforts to improve the situation of the Roma minority but remained concerned about the persistence of xenophobic attitudes and increased hate crimes against the Roma community. Norway took note of concerns raised about the new Constitution’s compatibility with Hungary’s human rights obligations. On Hungary’s new media legislation, Norway was concerned about possible restrictions in the freedom of the press by mandatory content requirements and “public morality” standards. Norway made recommendations. 58. Italy wished to obtain more information on the provisions aimed at guaranteeing the impartiality of the Media Council, on the competences of the Constitutional Court, on the retroactive implementation of some laws in connection to the protection of workers’ acquired rights, and on the activities of the Foundation for the International Prevention of Genocide and Mass Atrocities in narrowing the gap between “early warning” and “swift action”. 59. Germany paid tribute to the historic role that Hungary played in 1989. Germany asked about the Government’s plans to seek international expertise regarding the new Constitution, as advised by the Secretary-General, and the reasons for the new Constitution limiting the competences of the Constitutional Court. Germany referred to the Special Rapporteur on freedom of expression’s view that the new media law still contained elements incompatible with international human rights standards and it asked about the measures planned or taken to present a national action plan to overcome those inconsistencies. Germany made a recommendation. 60. Uruguay recognized the adoption of new legislation on national minorities and discrimination and the national strategy for the promotion of gender equality 2010-2021. It highlighted challenges such as the strengthening of the judiciary. It highlighted the system of allowances and benefits, particularly for the most needy pre-school children, but noted schools’ continued use of corporal punishment. It noted that Hungary was the first to ratify the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. Uruguay made recommendations. 61. The Netherlands noted that Hungary amended its new Media Law at the request of the European Commission and that further suggestions for improving the law were made by the United Nations Special Rapporteur on the right to freedom of opinion and expression as well as the Council of Europe and OSCE. Netherlands noted continued reports of gender-based violence, the lack of specific legislation prohibiting marital rape and the absence of a definition of discrimination against women, in line with the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women. It made recommendations. 62. Canada congratulated Hungary for its human rights initiatives at the national and international levels, including the establishment of the Foundation for the International Prevention of Genocide and Mass Atrocities. Canada referred to measures aimed at prohibiting the negation of the Holocaust, protecting minorities and preventing hate crimes, while protecting freedom of expression. Canada welcomed Hungary’s promotion of a European Union policy for Roma integration. Canada remained concerned at the varying education results between different communities and asked about the criteria for drawing up the national strategy for the integration of the Roma and progress expected over the next four years. Canada made recommendations. 63. The United States of America encouraged Hungary to continue its support for democratic principles and institutions. It expressed concern at continuing harsh conditions for Roma across the country and encouraged Hungary to continue engaging directly with local NGOs and civil society leaders to address persisting challenges. It also noted inequities in the treatment of women and discrimination and violence against persons on the basis of sexual orientation or gender identity. It further noted the recent passage of media laws and expressed concern over strict regulation and limitations on freedom of expression. The United States made recommendations. 64. Belgium commended the annual Budapest Human Rights Forum and Hungary’s National Strategy for the Promotion of Gender Equality. Concerned at patriarchal attitudes and prevailing stereotypes regarding women, Belgium inquired about measures to reduce gender disparity and ensure that domestic violence is prosecuted. It also inquired about envisaged amendments to the Media Law or measures to strengthen independence of media. Belgium noted concerns of discrimination against LGBT. Belgium made a recommendation. 65. Mexico acknowledged Hungary’s efforts to develop its legislative and institutional structure to protect and promote human rights and hoped that the new Constitution will contribute to those efforts. It inquired about civil and penal measures taken to prevent and eliminate discrimination, particularly against minorities and persons with disabilities. Mexico commended the fact that undocumented migration is not criminalized. It made recommendations. 66. Palestine referred to the third annual conference of the Budapest Human Rights Forum and the setting up of the Foundation for the International Prevention of Genocide and Mass Atrocities. Palestine noted the adoption of a National Strategy for the Promotion of Gender Equality for 2010-2021. Palestine encouraged Hungary to set up a strategy for the full integration of refugees and foreigners for their early and better integration in society. Palestine made recommendations. 67. Spain recognized Hungary’s efforts to promote and protect Roma human rights through the Roma Decade 2005-2015. It took note of Hungary’s announcement to ratify OP-CAT. Spain made recommendations. 68. Denmark noted the several steps taken by Hungary to tackle problems related to discrimination of the Roma minority but was concerned that Roma remained the most deprived group with respect to education, employment, health and housing. While encouraged by the Government’s commitment to find solutions to the problem of overcrowding in the country’s prisons, Denmark noted inter alia a worrying level of violence among young inmates. Denmark noted that for Denmark made recommendations. 69. Sweden noted steps taken and requested additional examples of how Hungary prevents and combats discrimination, especially racially motivated crimes against Roma people. Sweden welcomed support to victims of domestic violence as the problem was reportedly serious. Sweden expressed concern about sections in the newly adopted Constitution and encouraged the Government to consider any recommendations in this regard expected from the Council of Europe and the Venice Commission. It made recommendations. 70. Chile noted Hungary’s human rights commitment as reflected in the ratification of many international instruments; the adoption of laws against discrimination and for gender equality; integration measures for the Roma community, and promotion of socio- economic and cultural rights for disadvantaged groups. It highlighted the National Strategy to Promote Gender Equality and urged its continued implementation. Chile made recommendations. 71. The Holy See noted references to the Christian roots of the nation in the newly adopted Constitution and its provisions with regard to the embryo protection and recognition of marriage as a union between a man and a woman. The Holy See made a recommendation. 72. Argentina sought information on measures adopted to uphold fundamental rights and international standards as part of asylum and refugee procedures and on legislative provisions to prevent marital rape, domestic violence and sexual harassment. Argentina asked about the most recent actions taken under the strategy to promote gender equality 2010-2021 and results achieved. Argentina inquired about measures for ensuring the full enjoyment of rights for the Roma population. Argentina made recommendations 73. Afghanistan referred to steps taken to promote and protect human rights through recent legislative measures and the work of the Parliamentary Commission for Civil Rights and the Equal Treatment Authority. Afghanistan shared Hungary’s view on the need to continue efforts to alleviate the disadvantages faced by the Roma community. It supported Hungary’s prioritization of the possible adoption of an EU Roma Strategy. Afghanistan made recommendations. 74. The United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland welcomed Hungary’s establishment of, inter alia, the Foundation for the International Prevention of Genocide and Mass Atrocities. It asked what prior consideration was given to ensuring that elements of the Constitution, such as voting rights for persons under guardianship, did not run contrary to Hungary’s international human rights obligations. It asked about racist motivation constituting an aggravating circumstance for all ordinary criminal offences. Referring to the new Media Law, it asked how independence of the Media Authority and the Media Council was guaranteed. It made recommendations. 75. Guatemala referred to Hungary’s human rights institutional framework and recognized the importance of providing them with sufficient resources and independence to carry out their work. Guatemala sought information on the status of implementation of different treaty bodies’ recommendations especially on gender equality, violence against women and the rehabilitation of women and girl victims of trafficking. Guatemala expressed interest in the social and inclusion programmes for the Roma community and encouraged Hungary to continue to ensure the full enjoyment of human rights for minorities. It made a recommendation. 76. Bangladesh appreciated the adoption of the Decade for Roma Inclusion and the Constitutional provision on the prohibition of discrimination against women.  Bangladesh did not believe that removing a child from his or her own family for financial reasons contributed positively to a child’s well-being. Bangladesh shared treaty bodies’ concerns at the persistent discrimination and exclusion faced by Roma and women’s underrepresentation in political and public life.  It made recommendations. 77. Morocco noted efforts to integrate migrants into society and sought information on measures protecting their identity and maintaining links with their countries of origin. Morocco acknowledged human rights education and awareness-raising activities and the creation of the Budapest Human Rights Forum. It welcomed the prioritization of Roma rights in the context of Hungary’s European Union Presidency, the Programme for the Decade of Roma Inclusion, the new Roma education policy, and actions for victims of domestic violence. Morocco made recommendations. 78. The delegation reported on existing constitutional provisions to guarantee the conformity of the implementation of the new Constitution with international human rights obligations. Additionally, the Constitutional Court was mandated to examine and compare domestic legislation with international agreements for the identification of possible conflicts. 79. While the new Constitution contained a non-exhaustive list of grounds for discrimination, the case-law of the Constitutional Court prohibited discrimination based on sexual orientation. 80. With regard to the right to life, the delegation referred to the Constitutional provision that guaranteed the right to life and human dignity to everyone and separately stipulated that embryonic and fetal life should be subject to protection from the moment of conception. Having in mind that the current legal practice of the Constitutional Court had been in line with these provisions, there was no need for passing tougher legislation on abortion. 81. As regards the right to vote of persons with mental disability, the new Constitution contained positive provisions in line with Hungary’s international obligations. 82. The independence of the Equal Treatment Authority was guaranteed by, inter alia, its financial autonomy and the fact that its decisions could only be contested in court. 83. Having in mind that the legislation contained relevant provisions for the protection against enforced disappearances, Hungary will examine the possibility of ratifying the International Convention on Enforced Disappearances. 84. The minor and temporary limitations of the competence of the Constitutional Court were caused by the economic situation, which was claimed to have no serious impact on the ability of the Constitutional Court to review and decide upon cases brought before it. Furthermore, with the new constitutional right of an individual to appeal to the Constitutional Court, its oversight function had been strengthened. 85. Under the new Constitution, the Ombudsman will have a deputy responsible for the issue of future generations, including environmental protection. 86. The delegation reaffirmed the readiness of Hungary to cooperate with international organizations that expressed concerns about the new media legislation. Furthermore, Hungary will closely monitor the implementation of the legislation in practice, in particular those aspects which were highlighted by the experts of UN, OSCE and the Council of Europe. 87. Hungary launched a comprehensive programme to address violence in schools. In 2009, the ombudsman on educational rights conducted a comprehensive survey regarding violence in school. 88. The legislation prohibited discrimination and segregation in the education sector in line with relevant UNESCO conventions.  There were also several court decisions against administrative decisions causing segregation, including against the Roma pupils. 89. Children with multiple disadvantages, including those from the Roma community, received financial assistance for pre-school to higher education. The delegation reported on the Government’s plan to sign an agreement with the National Roma Self-Government in May 2011 to take a commitment for the creation of new jobs, the increase in access to secondary schools and the provision of scholarships for higher education to the Roma population in the coming four years. 90. The new Constitution contained provisions guaranteeing gender equality and the relevant legislation prohibited the discrimination against women both in the public and the private sectors. The national strategy to enhance equality of women and men aimed, inter alia, to eliminate wage gaps between men and women. 91. A normative integration strategy provided the main conditions for granting refugee status and the measures to facilitate their integration into society. 92. Regarding overcrowded prisons, the delegation informed about the target set by the Government to reduce by 39 per cent the occupancy of prisons. 93. In conclusion, the delegation assured the readiness of Hungary for continuous engagement with civil society and international organizations in the implementation of accepted recommendations made during the universal periodic review and the further improvement of the human rights situation. II. Conclusions and/or recommendations 94. The recommendations formulated during the interactive dialogue and listed below have been examined by Hungary and enjoy the support of Hungary: 94.1. Continue the process of ratifying OP-CAT (Czech Republic); 94.2. Consider ratifying OP-CAT (Brazil); 94.3. Ratify OP-CAT (Afghanistan); 94.4. Proceed with the ratification of the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment without delay (Denmark); 94.5. Sign and ratify OP-CAT and CED and declare to accept the competence of the Committee against Enforced Disappearances provided for in articles 31 and 32 of the Convention (France); 94.6. Study the possibility of becoming a party to the Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance (Argentina); 94.7. Sign and ratify the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance (Spain); 94.8. Continue to revise the criminal law to bring it fully in line with relevant international and regional obligations and in particular to ensure the protection of national, ethnic, religious or linguistic minorities (Switzerland); 94.9. Engage with the United Nations, the Organization for Security and Co.operation in Europe and the Council of Europe to ensure that their concerns about the media law are accommodated (Netherlands); 94.10. Strengthen its current laws and continue robust implementation of the Equal Treatment Law to ensure equality for women, including with regard to employment and educational opportunities, as well as ensuring access to the judicial system to address domestic violence, rape and sexual harassment (United States of America); 94.11. Consider adopting a comprehensive gender equality law that encompasses a definition of discrimination against women in accordance with the CEDAW and prohibits domestic violence and spousal rape (Brazil); 94.12. Ensure that the cardinal laws, resulting from the new Fundamental Law, do not contain provisions that discriminate against people with disabilities, women and LGBT people (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland); 94.13. Strengthen hate crimes laws to protect against violence motivated by gender identity, sexual orientation and intolerance, and implement public awareness campaigns to include law enforcement officials and to combat intolerance (United States of America); 94.14. Adopt legislation that prohibits domestic violence and marital rape (Netherlands); 94.15. Ensure that legislation introduced giving effect to the new Constitution complies with Hungary’s international human rights obligations (Australia); 94.16. Take steps to ensure that the constitutional changes concerning minority rights will not entail lowered guarantees compared to the current legal framework (Norway); 94.17. Consider establishing at the earliest a national human rights institution in full compliance with the Paris Principles (India); 94.18. Consider the possibility of establishing a national human rights institution in conformity with international standards (Algeria); 94.19. Consider establishing a national human rights institution in accordance with the Paris Principles (Republic of Moldova); 94.20. Consider the possibility of establishing a national human rights institution in conformity with the Paris Principles (Chile); 94.21. Establish an independent national human rights institution in accordance with the Paris Principles (Russian Federation); 94.22. Establish a national human rights institution in conformity with the Paris Principles (Ecuador); 94.23. Establish a national human rights institution in conformity with the Paris Principles (Argentina); 94.24. Establish the national human rights institution in accordance with the Paris Principles (Poland); 94.25. Establish a national human rights institution that is fully compliant with the Paris Principles (Australia); 94.26. Take all necessary measures to establish a national human rights institution according to the Paris Principles (Czech Republic); 94.27. Develop its national human rights institution to fully adapt it to the Paris Principles, with a legal mandate which is clear and as broad as possible, and with sufficient financial resources (Spain); 94.28. Examine the possibility of initiating an assessment of all existing mechanisms for the promotion and protection of human rights with a view to strengthening them as needed (Algeria); 94.29. Establish as soon as possible a plan of action to prevent racist attacks, so that members of vulnerable groups, including Roma, can live in safety and dignity (Switzerland); 94.30. Introduce the necessary measures to ensure full respect for the rights of persons with disabilities and women, as well as persons with a different sexual orientation (Switzerland); 94.31. Establish and implement a comprehensive integration strategy for an early-stage integration of migrants, refugees and asylum-seekers (Poland); 94.32. Take steps for further promotion and protection of the human rights in the country (Azerbaijan); 94.33. Continue to engage civil society in the process of implementation of UPR recommendations (Poland); 94.34. Issue a standing invitation to human rights special procedures (Palestine); 94.35. Continuity of the standing invitation for mandate holders of human rights special procedures (Afghanistan); 94.36. Eliminate the backlog of reports to the human rights treaty bodies and the responses to thematic questionnaires of HRC special procedures (Russian Federation); 94.37. Continue to closely consult with civil society in implementing the recommendations made during the UPR (Austria); 94.38. Eliminate discrimination against women (Bangladesh); 94.39. Implement the necessary measures to guarantee gender equality in law and in practice in conformity with international human rights standards (Ecuador); 94.40. Adopt measures to combat discrimination and promote equal economic and social opportunities for disadvantaged and marginalized individuals and groups (Islamic Republic of Iran); 94.41. Intensify efforts to combat all forms of discrimination to make effective the equality of opportunities and treatment among all inhabitants in its territory, with particular care and attention to women and children who are in the situation of more vulnerability, such as those who belong to the Roma people (Argentina); 94.42. Take steps to bring about a change in attitudes with a view to eliminating deep-rooted stereotypes regarding the roles and responsibilities of women and men in the family and in society, which are reflected in women’s educational choice, their situation in the labour market and their underrepresentation in political and public life and decision making positions (Republic of Moldova); 94.43. Ensure the collection of necessary statistical data disaggregated by ethnicity and gender in order to measure, monitor, and remedy ethnic discrimination as proposed by the independent expert on minority issues (Russian Federation); 94.44. Intensify measures to tackle extremism and discrimination against religious and ethnic minority groups, including the Roma people (Australia); 94.45. Continue to take necessary measures to combat racism and hate crimes (Palestine); 94.46. Take effective measures to curb racial hatred and discrimination against the Roma population (Bangladesh); 94.47. Take concrete measures to prevent and combat violence against members of other minorities and vulnerable groups, especially racially motivated hate crimes against and discrimination of the Roma and to promote their integration into society (Republic of Korea); 94.48. Strengthen measures directed towards the protection from discrimination and further integration of the Roma (Belarus); 94.49. Take concrete and stern action to ensure equal treatment for all in the society, in particular to remove de facto discrimination against Roma people (Pakistan); 94.50. Introduce national measures to reduce school segregation and actively promote participation in society through education among the Roma community (Norway); 94.51. Take further efforts aimed at broad social inclusion, in particular in the labour market, of Roma populations (Brazil); 94.52. Confirm its commitment to equality and non-discrimination by explicitly prohibiting any discrimination on grounds of sexual orientation and gender identity (France); 94.53. Make efforts to actively combat homophobic, anti-Semitic and anti-Roma rhetoric, including by ensuring law enforcement and judicial authorities are made aware of guidelines on identifying and investigating racially motivated crime (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland); 94.54. Strengthen the implementation of non-discrimination and hate crime legislation by continuing to monitor incidents; by ensuring that racially motivated violence is fully and effectively investigated; and by implementing measures to encourage Roma and other victims to report hate crimes and to ensure their protection from reprisal when they do (Thailand); 94.55. Continue its efforts to achieve full social integration of minorities, especially the Roma and take urgent measures to combat and prevent racist incidents and hate crimes (Uruguay); 94.56. Take all appropriate measures to protect children effectively from being exposed to violence, racism and pornography through mobile technology, video movies, games and other technologies, including the Internet (Pakistan); 94.57. Prevent violence against Roma women and girls, including their harassment at school, and fill the gaps in Roma women’s formal education (Islamic Republic of Iran); 94.58. Strengthen measures to prevent, combat and sanction inequality, discrimination and racially motivated violence (Norway); 94.59. Implement the necessary measures to fulfil CRPD so there may be full realization of the rights of this important segment of the population (Ecuador); 94.60. Continue to be committed, via its Equal Treatment Authority, to implement and train its citizens as regards to equal treatment for all, and to eradicate violence and discrimination against women and offer greater protection and equal opportunities to the Roma community (Holy See); 94.61. Ensure that the members of the Roma community, but also of other vulnerable groups, are protected from violence and attacks (Indonesia); 94.62. Ensure that members of the Roma community, and members of other vulnerable groups, are protected from violence and attack, including when these groups wish to assembly, hold events or organize demonstrations (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland); 94.63. Improve the treatment of prisoners and prison conditions (Islamic Republic of Iran); 94.64. Continue its efforts to combat overcrowding of prisons in order to facilitate the successful reinsertion into society of previously convicted persons (Denmark); 94.65. Implement the recently adopted United Nations rules of treatment of women prisoners and non-custodial measures from women offenders, otherwise known as Bangkok rules, to ensure that special needs of women in prisons or in custody are appropriately addressed (Thailand); 94.66. Take measures to ensure the protection of the rights of victims of domestic violence and spousal rape (Finland); 94.67. Continue the work for enhanced protection for victims of domestic violence and take measures with a focus on prevention and accountability in regards to domestic violence (Sweden); 94.68. Rehabilitate and socially integrate women and girl victims of trafficking (Islamic Republic of Iran); 94.69. Investigate the causes of human trafficking and compile statistical data on the subject in order to find the most effective means to combat this phenomenon (Honduras); 94.70. Take further measures for the rehabilitation and social integration of women and girls who are victims of trafficking (Azerbaijan); 94.71. Strengthen measures for the rehabilitation and social integration of women and girls victims of trafficking (Brazil); 94.72. Increase efforts to effectively prevent trafficking in women and girls for sexual exploitation and domestic servitude and take measures for rehabilitation and social integration of women and girls who are victims of trafficking (Republic of Moldova); 94.73. Step up efforts to combat the trafficking in human beings, including the development of international cooperation with interested Governments, international organizations and NGOs (Belarus); 94.74. Consider the question of toughening the criminal liability for trafficking in human beings (Belarus); 94.75. Adopt measures to collect disaggregated data on the phenomenon of human trafficking and adopt and implement policies to address it (Egypt); 94.76. Ensure, in line with the recommendation of the Committee on the Rights of Child, the implementation in practice the prohibition of corporal punishment in schools (Russian Federation); 94.77. Bring fully its system of juvenile justice into line with the CRC and ensure that detention of children under 18 should be separated from adults (Thailand); 94.78. Take measures, including disciplinary measures, to bring to the attention of those working in the educational system, in particular teachers, their obligation to refrain from corporal punishment (Uzbekistan); 94.79. Adopt measures, including disciplinary measures, in order to raise the awareness of professionals of the education system, in particular teachers, on their obligation of abstaining from resorting to corporal punishment (Uruguay); 94.80. Adopt practical and legislative measures to ensure impartial and effective investigation of cases of ill-treatment by law enforcement bodies (Uzbekistan); 94.81. Ensure that racially motivated violence and other hate crimes are fully and effectively investigated and that those responsible are prosecuted under the laws providing for sanctions which reflect the gravity of the human rights abuses (Indonesia); 94.82. Introduce professional training, capacity-building and cooperation for law enforcement and judicial authorities to identify and address racially motivated crimes (Norway); 94.83. Ensure that victims of hate crimes have access to assistance and protection, including counselling and legal assistance (Austria); 94.84. Ensure adequate training for the police and judiciary to promptly and effectively deal with hate crimes (Austria); 94.85. Ensure training for police officers, prosecutors and judges in order to ensure that they can recognize, investigate and prosecute hate crimes (Canada); 94.86. Work with the Roma self-governments, NGOs and human rights organizations to implement measures to encourage Roma and other victims to report hate crimes and, when they do, to protect them from reprisals (Indonesia); 94.87. Bring the juvenile justice system fully in line with the relevant conventions and United Nations standards (Islamic Republic of Iran); 94.88. Adopt a programme to safeguard the rights of victims of torture and ill-treatment (Islamic Republic of Iran); 94.89. Ensure that the recently enacted media laws are implemented in full respect for the fundamental right to freedom of opinion and expression (Austria); 94.90. Comply fully with its obligations and commitments related to freedom of expression, including for members of the press (United States of America); 94.91. Ensure that the restriction of some right, such as the right to vote for people with disabilities, is carried out with all the due guarantees and in line with the provisions of the Convention (Uruguay); 94.92. Take the necessary measures to remedy the low participation of women in public and political life (Morocco); 94.93. Take all necessary measures to promote equality in education in favour of all members of minority groups, especially Roma children (Greece); 94.94. Take measures to guarantee the right to equal education for Roma children (Finland); 94.95. Commit to improving school results of Roma pupils by 2015 (Canada); 94.96. Aim to eliminate segregated education, which is not based on strict individual assessment, and draft a national strategy for the introduction of an inclusive education (Finland); 94.97. Continue its efforts to ensure that children with disabilities exercise their right to education to the fullest extent possible and facilitate their integration into the general education system (Uruguay); 94.98. Take effective measures to ensure equal access of women to the labour market and to narrow and ultimately close the wage gap between men and women (Egypt); 94.99. Take the necessary measures to reduce the unemployment rate among Roma minority in the public and private sectors, including if necessary taking affirmative actions (Mexico); 94.100. Investigate, and in the future prevent, cases mentioned by CESCR of the denied access of Roma to health services and  their segregation in hospitals, including the existence of  separate maternity wards for Roma women in some hospitals (Russian Federation); 94.101. Continue the implementation of the measures to effectively protect minorities (Chile); 94.102. Intensify the fight against prejudices towards minority groups, the Roma in particular (Germany); 94.103. Persevere in its policy of promotion and protection of the rights of minorities and vulnerable persons (Morocco); 94.104. Ensure urgently, through stable and systematic funding, continued functioning of the two bilingual Slovenian-Hungarian schools in Gornji Senik/Felsöszölnök and Stevanovic/Apátistvánfalva (Slovenia); 94.105. Ensure stable and systematic funding for the media of the Slovenian minority in Hungary, namely for Radio Monoster/Szentgotthárd, the Porabje weekly and the Slovenian TV programme (Slovenia ); 94.106. Place special emphasis on addressing the socio-economic disadvantages of the Roma, particularly in the areas of employment, education, housing and access to health services. Segregation in school should be eliminated through both incentives and sufficient penalty in case of violation (Thailand); 94.107. Take further measures to ensure that Roma people fully enjoy their human rights, including by preventing and combating discrimination and racially motivated crimes against Roma people (Sweden); 94.108. Increase public actions to allow the access to education, health, employment and decent housing for the Roma community, and put emphasis on combating violence against Roma women (Spain); 94.109. Support the integration of the Roma and other minorities in Government institutions, by recruiting and promoting these minorities in the police, in the education sector and the public service (Canada); 94.110. Strengthen its efforts to improve the social, political, living, and health conditions for Romani citizens through legal, administrative and socio.economic means (United States of America); 94.111. Proceed to forced expulsions only in strict compliance with international and regional standards (Switzerland); 94.112. Improve the living conditions of asylum-seekers (Islamic Republic of Iran); 94.113. Step up efforts directed towards the improvement of conditions and treatments of asylum-seekers and refugees (Belarus). 95. The following recommendations will be examined by Hungary, which will provide responses in due course, but no later than the eighteenth session of the Human Rights Council in September 2011: 95.1. Ratify the main United Nations human rights instruments, particularly ICRMW, OP-CAT and CED (Ecuador); 95.2. Sign and ratify the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (Spain); 95.3. Consider the progressive ratification of pending human rights international treaties (Chile); 95.4. Specify the prohibition of the death penalty in a future organic law (France); 95.5. Amend the Criminal Code with a view to including all elements of the definition of torture as provided for in article 1 of CAT (Czech Republic); 95.6. Introduce additional measures to ensure that the new Media Act complies with regional and international human rights standards (Switzerland); 95.7. Look into the current regulatory framework so as to remove parts of the legislation that may challenge freedom of speech and independence of the press and other media (Norway); 95.8. Reconsider legislation and laws in connection with freedom of opinion and expression and general freedoms (Palestine); 95.9. Incorporate in its national legislation a definition of discrimination against women that is consistent with the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (Belgium); 95.10. Draft and implement a fully comprehensive law on gender equality and a law on combating gender violence (Spain); 95.11. Adopt a comprehensive gender equality law that contains a definition of discrimination against women in accordance with CEDAW (Netherlands); 95.12. Establish specific legislation to fill the legislative gap of a lack of specific legal provisions to prohibit domestic violence and marital rape (Honduras); 95.13. Take measures towards adopting specific legislation prohibiting domestic violence and spousal rape (Finland); 95.14. Reconsider the relevant provisions of the new Constitution in order to ensure keeping access to abortion as a safe and legal option, and to ensure that the same protection and rights apply to every person regardless of their sexual orientation (Norway); 95.15. Establish a comprehensive human rights framework upon which to develop more coordinated and effective policy measures and strategies for promoting human rights and that such a framework includes initiatives to set up a national human rights institutions in line with the Paris Principles (Republic of Korea); 95.16. Elevate the status of the national machinery for the advancement of women, strengthen its mandate, provide the necessary human and financial resources to endow it with sufficient authority and decision-making power for coordinating effectively the Government’s work to promote gender equality (Republic of Moldova); 95.17. Establish a national human rights programme which fully incorporates international instruments to which Hungary is a party (Mexico); 95.18. Elaborate a national human rights plan (Spain); 95.19. Establish and operate a country-wide system to monitor and record racist incidents and hate crimes (Indonesia); 95.20. Elaborate a specific law on domestic violence against women (Pakistan); 95.21. Monitor the functioning of media regulatory bodies and the application of penalties in order to ensure they remain separated from outside influence (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland); 95.22. Increase financial and welfare support to families living in conditions of poverty so that families living in a situation of poverty can raise their children with adequate amenities as required for healthy upbringing of those children (Bangladesh); 95.23. Reconcile policies related to ethnic Hungarians abroad with neighbouring countries primary responsibility for minority protection (Norway); 95.24. Implement fully the Agreement on Guaranteeing Special Rights of the Slovenian Minority in the Republic of Hungary and the Hungarian National Community in the Republic of Slovenia and the recommendations of the mixed Slovenian-Hungarian Commission tasked with the monitoring of the implementation of the Agreement (Slovenia); 95.25. Reduce to the minimum possible administrative detention of migrants, asylum-seekers and refugees, and only use it in exceptional cases (Mexico); 95.26. Take all relevant measures to avoid prolongation of administrative detention of asylum-seekers during which the freedom of movement is considerably restricted (Czech Republic); 95.27. Establish adequate mechanisms to identify potential asylum-seekers in border procedures; undertake measures aimed at avoiding prolongation of administrative detention of asylum-seekers and at improving the living conditions and treatment of asylum-seekers and refugees (Brazil); 95.28. Recognize and guarantee the human rights of all foreigners, independent and regardless of their migratory status (Ecuador); 95.29. Bring official development assistance (ODA) up to the internationally committed 0.7 per cent of GDP (Bangladesh). 96. The recommendations below did not enjoy the support of Hungary: 96.1. Consider becoming a party to the International Convention on the Rights of Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families (Egypt); 96.2. Study the possibility to become a party to the Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families (Argentina); 96.3. Ratify the Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families (Islamic Republic of Iran); 96.4. Accede to the Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families as a fundamental step in the protection of human rights (Guatemala); 96.5. Accede to the Convention on the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families in accordance with Recommendation 1737 of 17 March 2006 of the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe (Algeria); 96.6. In line with the recommendations of the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, revoke the condition which requires a minority group to have lived in the county at least one hundred years in order to be considered a national minority (Russian Federation). 97. All conclusions and/or recommendations contained in the present report reflect the position of the submitting State(s) and/or the State under review. They should not be construed as endorsed by the Working Group as a whole. Annex Composition of the delegation The delegation of Hungary was headed by Mr. Zoltán Balog, Minister for State for Social Inclusion, Ministry of Public Administration and Justice, and composed of the following members: • Ms. Hanna Páva, Deputy State Secretary, Ministry of National Resources; • Mr. Csaba Latorcai, Deputy State Secretary, Ministry of Public Administration and Justice; • Mr. Ferenc Zombor, Deputy State Secretary, Ministry of Public Administration and Justice; • Mr. János Hóvári, Deputy State Secretary, Ministry of Foreign Affairs; • Mr. 	András Dékány, Ambassador, Permanent Representative, Permanent Mission of the Republic of Hungary to the United Nations in Geneva; • Mr. István 	Lakatos, Ambassador at Large on Human Rights, Permanent Mission of the Republic of Hungary to the United Nations in Geneva; • Mr. Norbert Tóth, Head of Cabinet, Ministry of Public Administration and Justice; • Mr. Lajos Aáry-Tamás, Ministerial Commissioner for Educational Rights; • Mr. László Huszár, Brigadier General, General Head of Department Hungarian Prison Service Headquarters; • Mr. Lipót Höltzl, Head of Department, Ministry of Public Administration and Justice; • Mr. Péter Glóner, Deputy Head of Cabinet, Ministry of Interior; • Ms. Anikó Orbán, Head of Section, Ministry Of National Resources; • Mr. Hedvig Lakatos, Deputy Head of Department, Ministry 	of National Resources; • Mr. Tamás Molnár, Head of Department, Ministry of Interior; • Mr. Márk Horváth, Counsellor, Deputy Permanent Representative, Permanent Mission of the Republic of Hungary to the United Nations in Geneva; • Ms. Ágnes Hevesi, Senior Advisor, Ministry of Foreign Affairs; • Ms. Mariann	 Arany-Tóth, Chief Legal Advisor, Ministry for National Economy; • Ms. Zsófia Elek, Legal Advisor, Ministry of Public Administration and Justice; • Mr. Péter Csuhány, Legal Adviser,	 Ministry of Public Administration and Justice; • Mr. Márk Lengyel, Attorney-Adviser, Ministry of Public Administration and Justice; • Ms. Zsuzsa Sebestyén, Desk Officer, Ministry of Public Administration and Justice; • Mr. Zoltán	 Papp, First Secretary, Permanent Mission of the Republic of Hungary to the United Nations in Geneva; • Mr. Balázs Rátkai, First Secretary, Permanent Mission of the Republic of Hungary to the United Nations in Geneva; • Mr. Milán Magyar, Third Secretary, Permanent Mission Of the Republic of Hungary to the United Nations in Geneva; • Ms. Anna Fülöp, Adviser, Ministry of Public Administration and Justice; • Mr. Gábor Fekete, Interpreter • Mr. Sándor Iváncsó, Interpreter 