United Nations A/HRC/16/18 Distr.: General 12 January 2011 Original: English General Assembly Human Rights Council Sixteenth session Agenda item 6 Universal Periodic Review Report of the Working Group on the UniversalPeriodic Review* ** Lebanon * Previously issued as document A/HRC/WG.6/9/L.16.  The annex to the present report is circulated as received. ** Late submission. Contents Paragraphs Page Introduction............................................................................................................. 1–4 3 
I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process................................................ 5–79 3 
A. Presentation by the State under review........................................................... 6–16 3 
B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review........................ 17–79 5 
II. Conclusions and/or recommendations..................................................................... 80–85 13  Annex Composition of the delegation ......................................................................................................... 22 Introduction 1. The Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review, established in accordance with Human Rights Council resolution 5/1, held its ninth session from 1 to 12 November 2010.  The review of Lebanon was held at the 15th meeting on 10 November 2010. The delegation of Lebanon was headed by Ambassador William Habib, Secretary-General of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. At its 17th meeting held on 12 November 2010, the Working Group adopted the report on Lebanon. 2. On 21 June 2010, the Human Rights Council selected the following group of rapporteurs (troika) to facilitate the review of Lebanon: Chile, Malaysia and Nigeria. 3. In accordance with paragraph 15 of the annex to resolution 5/1, the following documents were issued for the review of Lebanon: (a) A national report submitted/written presentation made in accordance with paragraph 15 (a) (A/HRC/WG.6/9/LBN/1); (b) A compilation prepared by the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) in accordance with paragraph 15 (b) (A/HRC/WG.6/9/LBN/2); (c) A summary prepared by OHCHR in accordance with paragraph 15 (c) (A/HRC/WG.6/9/LBN/3). 4. A list of questions prepared in advance by Belgium, Denmark, Germany, Ireland, Latvia, the Netherlands, Norway, Slovenia, Sweden and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland was transmitted to Lebanon through the troika. These questions are available on the extranet of the UPR. I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process 5. During the interactive dialogue, 49 delegations made statements.  A number of delegations thanked Lebanon for its constructive participation, openness and willingness to cooperate in the universal periodic review process and acknowledged Lebanon’s efforts in the promotion and protection of human rights and challenges the country faced. Active dialogue with civil society during the preparation of the national report was positively noted. Additional statements which could not be delivered during the interactive dialogue owing to time constraints are posted on the Extranet of the universal periodic review when available1 Recommendations made during the dialogue are to be found in section II of the present report. A. Presentation by the State under review 6. In his opening remarks the head of delegation noted Lebanon’s commitment in the Constitution to the UDHR and its contribution to the drafting of this instrument.  He stated that the UPR was an effective tool to promote human rights globally.  At the national level, it stimulated efforts to develop conditions on the ground as well as self- criticism. 7. In preparing the national report, Lebanon had adopted an inclusive and consultative approach. It had been produced with contributions from focal points in all Ministries and 1 	Argentina, Chad, China, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Denmark, Ghana, Holy See, Indonesia, Latvia, Mauritania, Nepal, Nigeria, Philippines, Republic of Korea, Slovenia, Sweden. relevant bodies, compiled by a committee created by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. The parliamentary committee for human rights and civil society was included in this process, reflecting Lebanon’s belief in partnerships with NGOs in promoting and protecting human rights. 8. Lebanon had a unique social and political composition reflecting its religious and cultural variety. Pope John Paul II had thus described it as more than a nation, indeed a message and a mission. This variety had been a source of wealth for Lebanon and represented the coexistence between different religions and cultures. Since independence in 1943, Lebanon had a democratic parliamentary system with an active political life, where each element of the social fabric had its role in an atmosphere of liberty and freedom. 9. The pluralistic social reality had its challenges and difficulties. Lebanon had undergone many crises, leaving a difficult legacy. In addition to hosting numerous Palestinian refugees, it had been subject to a series of invasions and aggressions by Israel, which continued to impede the recovery of stability and made it difficult for the Government to fulfil its human rights obligations. This had resulted in a budget deficit and record public debt, resulting in high unemployment rates and the emigration of large numbers of Lebanese citizens. It did not however halt efforts to protect human rights and its accession to all core human rights treaties and several regional instruments. 10. Lebanon was currently at a critical stage. A National Action Plan for Human Rights was being elaborated by the parliamentary committee on human rights with the contribution of relevant Ministries, civil society and international organizations. Other efforts to develop effective and competent mechanisms to ensure the application of human rights standards and the provisions of the Action Plan included: • The establishment of a NHRI in line with the Paris Principles: A draft bill was under consideration by the Ministry of Justice. It included mechanisms for the prevention of terrorism in line with the provisions of OP-CAT. • The creation of an Ombudsman: A bill had been issued in 2005 and the Government was taking steps for an appointment. • The creation 	of an office of human rights in the Ministry of Interior and Municipalities, the Directorate General of the Internal Security Forces, and considerations concerning a department of human rights in the Ministry of Interior. • The establishment of a directorate general of human rights and public liberties in the Ministry of Justice. • The development of relations with international organizations, particularly OHCHR and its mechanisms. Lebanon had recently facilitated the visit of the Sub-Committee on the Prevention of Torture and was consulting with the Special Rapporteur on contemporary forms of slavery on a possible visit. 11. In response to advance questions, the head of delegation recalled that Lebanon had undergone many wars, the latest in June 2006, which had been the subject of a Council decision resulting in a report by the High-Level Commission of Inquiry. These wars had destabilized the country, damaged the infrastructure and led to involuntary disappearances, which had yet to be addressed. 12. Lebanon was determined to eradicate and prevent torture. It had acceded to OP.CAT. Draft laws for the prevention of torture and the establishment of an independent national mechanism were under discussion. The Internal Security Forces had issued a memorandum for the establishment of a special commission for the monitoring of torture and detention centres. 13. As regards the jurisdiction of military courts, this had been expanded as a result of the prevailing security situation. 14. A Lebanese-Palestinian Dialogue Committee had been created to improve refugees’ conditions and find solutions in areas such as employment and education. In cooperation with UNRWA, two laws had been enacted on specific benefits for Palestinians at the termination of service or in the case of accidents. The right to work was granted to Palestinians residing in Lebanon. However, humanitarian assistance, in terms of education, living condition and health, were primarily to be shouldered by the international community through UNRWA. In accordance with the fundamental objective of the return of refugees to their homeland and in light of Lebanon’s delicate demographic composition, the Constitution provided that Lebanon would not allow settlement of Palestinian on its lands. 15. Concerning the overcrowding of prisons, Lebanon was in need of further assistance. It was applying the law on the reduction of sentences and preparing a draft law on alternative punishment. The administration of prisons had been moved from the Ministry of Interior to the Ministry of Justice. 16. In conclusion, the head of delegation reconfirmed the Government’s commitment and full respect of international standards of human rights and its commitment to cooperation with international mechanisms and civil society organizations. B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review 17. Algeria noted that the ratification by Lebanon of most international human rights instruments was proof of its commitment to human rights.  It further noted that the issue of the foreign workforce in Lebanon posed challenges.  Algeria appreciated efforts to improve the situation of Palestinian refugees, including with regard to improved access to the labour market. Algeria wished Lebanon success in its endeavours, in spite of existing threats to its security and sovereignty. Algeria made recommendations. 18. Qatar noted that the political and legal system guaranteed respect for basic freedoms, social justice and equality of rights without discrimination.  While repeated aggressions and resulting political and social crises had hampered development and the enjoyment of human rights, Lebanon had made efforts to overcome the difficulties and improve living conditions, particularly for vulnerable groups, and to revive its economy.  Qatar made recommendations. 19. Sudan expressed understanding for challenges faced by Lebanon due to the Israeli occupation of Palestinian and other Arab lands, but valued the achievements made in the area of human rights. Sudan expressed appreciation for the draft law by the Ministry of Labour on retirement and social protection and old age and inquired about the main provisions.  Sudan made recommendations. 20. Oman noted that Lebanon was party to the major human rights instruments, which demonstrated its commitment to human rights and to complying with its international obligations. Oman expressed its conviction that the promotion and protection of human rights was a strategic choice for Lebanon on the path towards progress and stability, and noted that fundamental rights were guaranteed by the Constitution.  Oman made a recommendation. 21. Saudi Arabia noted that the Lebanese Constitution contained a section dedicated to human rights and that the Government had made progress at the legal and institutional level, in spite of difficulties related to economic and security aspects. Saudi Arabia further commended the excellent cooperation by Lebanon with United Nations mechanisms, particularly OHCHR, whose regional office it hosted, and with special procedures, among others.  Saudi Arabia made recommendations. 22. Bahrain noted that Lebanon had taken a number of measures for the promotion and protection of human rights, in particular with regard to human trafficking and women’s rights, and appreciated the launching of a project and national committee to prevent and fight trafficking.  Bahrain further commended the appointment of women to high-level governmental and judicial positions as well as efforts taken on an action plan and draft law to combat violence against women, and draft legislation to fight trafficking.  Bahrain requested additional information on measures to combat violence against women and made recommendations. 23. Greece noted with appreciation the fact that Lebanon was a party to the core human rights treaties. It underscored the Government’s efforts to solve the issue of missing persons. Greece acknowledged Lebanon’s efforts to combat human trafficking and requested that Lebanon shared its experience in addressing this issue. It made recommendations. 24. Palestine noted that instability in Lebanon resulting from wars and destruction to which it had been exposed had hampered developments in the area of human rights. Furthermore, Palestinian refugees had been deprived of their rights, including the right to return confirmed by GA resolution 194, and the right to self-determination, due to the occupation of their land and other Arab lands by Israel. Palestine commended recent amendment in Lebanese labour law, which gave Palestinians partial access to the labour market.  Palestine made recommendations. 25. The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela noted that despite the negative impact of the military aggressions by Israel, resulting in a high number of deaths and injuries as well as massive destruction of infrastructure, Lebanon demonstrated commitment to human rights and hosted an OHCHR regional office.  Venezuela acknowledged the progress achieved in the areas of education, in particular basic education and health.  Venezuela made a recommendation. 26. Cuba recognized Lebanon’s efforts to achieve socio-economic development which had been hampered by invasions and aggressions causing loss of life and property on a large scale. Nevertheless, there were achievements in the area of human rights, such as compulsory basic education, the initiative Education for All and programs to combat illiteracy.  Vulnerable groups, particularly children, women and persons with disabilities, had benefited from positive developments.  Cuba made recommendations. 27. Mexico noted progress in preventing torture and in working conditions, despite the instability that had prevailed in Lebanon. The establishment of a national human rights institution would contribute to improvement in the human rights situation. Mexico made recommendations. 28. Tunisia noted that Lebanon’s commitment to human rights manifested itself in the political will of the government as well as its dynamic institutions, and observed that it also hosted the OHCHR regional office.  Lebanon was implementing a national plan for human rights in line with the recommendations of the Vienna Conference.  Tunisia noted that Lebanon remained a model of coexistence and the integration of different confessional communities in spite of repeated aggressions by Israel. Tunisia made a recommendation. 29. Iraq noted that Lebanon had made considerable progress in the human rights protection. With its diverse society, it had adopted a consensual type of government that was considered a model in the Arab world and which persisted in spite of the many crises with which Lebanon had been faced. Human rights and fundamental freedoms were protected by the Constitution, and Lebanon also adhered to the main international human rights instruments. Iraq inquired about measures taken to rebuild schools and orphanages destroyed by the occupying power during the 2006 aggression on Beirut and southern Lebanon. 30. Brazil noted that the assessment of Lebanon’s human rights situation should take into account the recent history of armed conflict, foreign occupation and intervention. It recognized the recent progress, including in the areas of women’s rights, poverty reduction, prevention of child labour and improvements in living conditions of Palestinian refugees. It also acknowledged the existence of a vibrant civil society. Brazil made recommendations.  31. Jordan noted that Lebanon paid special attention to the promotion of human rights and particularly commended efforts taken to strengthen the freedom of opinion and expression. Jordan welcomed efforts to promote the rights to education and health and the advancement of women, including their participation in political life and decision-making. Jordan made recommendations. 32. Armenia appreciated the historic role of Lebanon as a sanctuary for victims of grave human rights violations, who turned genocide survivors into an equal part of its consensual family, and referred to Lebanon’s achievements in constructing a democratic society. Armenia welcomed Lebanon’s intention to ban the death penalty and encouraged Lebanon to maintain its tolerant approach towards all religious groups. Armenia made recommendations. 33. India took positive note of the establishment of the Parliamentary Committee on Human Rights, the Office of the Directorate-General of Human Rights and the National Commission to Combat Trafficking. It appreciated also the establishment of an inter-ministerial committee to develop the National Social Development Strategy. India requested information about the measures that were taken to secure the right of its citizens to adequate and decent housing.  34. Israel put on record its strong objection to the inappropriate and abusive language used to reference the country in paragraph 2 of Lebanon’s national report.  It stated that the existence of a dominant terrorist organization, Hizbullah, and political tensions had created a grave human right situation for the Lebanese people.2 In this regard, it cited unlawful killings, enforced disappearances, arbitrary detentions, torture and discrimination, among others, and made recommendations. It noted that it looked forward to the day when Israel and a free and sovereign Lebanon would enjoy peaceful and friendly relations. 35. Malaysia, noted improved stability as well as challenges in promoting human rights in result of a prolonged war, foreign intervention and partial occupation, among others. It noted that Lebanon hosted a large number of Palestinian and other refugees residing and acknowledged the steps that were taken by Lebanon in cooperation with UN agencies to ensure a decent life for the refugees. Malaysia made recommendations. 36. Bangladesh noted with appreciation the fact that: Lebanon was a party to the majority of human rights treaties; it had a vibrant civil society; and made a decision to establish an independent human rights institution. It expressed concern at some instances of poor working conditions and violations of the rights of migrant workers. Bangladesh appreciated Lebanon’s efforts to protect human rights despite the challenges resulting from war. It made recommendations. 2 	Lebanon objected that the statement was not in line with the procedures of the UPR and that the language used was inadequate for the august Council. It called for these expressions to be deleted from the record. If there were no Israeli occupation there would be no resistance. Resistance against foreign occupation is a legitimate right enshrined in international instruments. 37.  Morocco appreciated measures taken to ensure the right to education for all citizens, and particularly the national plan for education 2003-2015.  Morocco requested information on efforts to spread a culture of human rights through school education as well as training for government, judicial and security personnel. It valued legal protections of the freedoms of opinion, association and the media. 38. Pakistan noted with satisfaction that, despite cultural and religious diversity, no group was excluded or discriminated in their daily lives. It noted that the aggression by Israel had hampered the Government’s capacity to promote and protect human rights. Pakistan stated that Lebanon’s commitment to human rights was evident through its accession to most of the international human rights instruments. It made recommendations. 39. The Islamic Republic of Iran noted that despite many constraints, Lebanon had reached progress and achievements in the field of human rights. It commended Lebanon for its efforts in the protection of human rights, namely improvements in the institutional and legislative area, rights of children, women and refugees. Iran made recommendations. 40. In responding to statements made, the head of delegation noted that the preparation of the national report was the responsibility of the country and reflected its vision and position. It was not up to the judgment of any other party in terms of language used. He also noted that instability was the result of repeated Israeli attacks and that the best way to solving this problem was to address its root-causes, namely the foreign occupation of parts of the Lebanese territory and the lack of a just and durable solution to the Palestinian question.3 4 41. Concerning the citizenship law, an amendment was under consideration so as to correct the current discrimination between men and women in acquiring citizenship. Free courtesy residence was granted for three years to the husband and children of a Lebanese woman married to a foreigner. Society was still divided on the conditions to grant citizenship, due to the unique composition of Lebanese society. This made it difficult to withdraw the relevant reservation to CEDAW. Concerning personal status laws, the reasons for discrimination were due to a lack of a unified personal status law. Individual were governed by their own respective religious laws. While the government had previously prepared a draft law for civil marriage, this had not been adopted, as all religious groups had rejected it. 42. Concerning gender equality in social security, the National Commission for Women had requested parliament to submit a draft law concerning the equal allotment of social security particularly for sickness, health and family allowances. A draft law on domestic violence had been recently adopted and was in the final stages of adoption in the Cabinet. Concerning political participation, a law to specify a gender quota was also under discussion in Parliament. 43. Lebanon had adopted a law on persons with disabilities establishing a National Committee for the Disabled and providing a number of services for people with special needs.  The ratification of the Convention on Rights of Persons with Disabilities was now 3 	Israel noted that the meeting was supposed to discuss the human rights situation in Lebanon, which was under the responsibility of the Government of Lebanon. It stated that remarks made felt outside the scope of the UPR and requesting that those remarks regarding Israel be struck from the report of this working group. 4 	In response, Lebanon noted that the delegation did not wish to provoke any person in the room, but observed that one statement referred to internal affairs in Lebanon in a manner that was unsuitable within the United Nations. It called for the deletion of all language that was not in line with the terminology used in the United Nations. The head of delegation noted that he was simply exercising his right of reply to what was said in the Council. before Parliament.  The Ministry of Education focused on the integration of children with special needs, inter alia by ensuring that buildings and premises were adapted and that an enabling environment for these children was created to ensure their integration into mainstream education. 44. Concerning the submission of treaty body reports, the head of delegation acknowledged certain delays attributable to the difficult situation in Lebanon. The Minister of Foreign Affairs would act as coordinator in the near future. 45. The Netherlands welcomed steps that were taken by Lebanon to establish independent national mechanism for the prevention of torture and it encouraged the Government to take further action to prevent torture. It also welcomed the newly amended national legislation on registered Palestinian refugees. The Netherlands made recommendations. 46. Egypt noted that conflicts had had a negative effect on the internal situation in Lebanon, which continued to suffer occupation of some of its territories and related attacks, which constituted violations, had negatively affected the internal situation and the enjoyment of human rights. Nevertheless it had demonstrated political will in protecting human rights. Egypt valued efforts taken to fight human trafficking, and to protect the rights of women and children and to raise awareness in this regard.  Egypt called on the international community to ease Lebanon’s burden in hosting refugees. It made recommendations. 47. Poland appreciated the progress made by Lebanon in improving human rights situation. It referred to the concerns expressed by the UN bodies about the phenomenon of the child labour and the legitimacy of corporal punishment. It asked about the steps Lebanon intended to take to ensure the implementations of procedures and mechanisms concerning children’s rights. Poland made recommendations. 48. Thailand noted Lebanon’s efforts in the promotion of freedom of association and freedom of speech and implementation of the CRC’s principles and provisions. It noted the burden of hosting refugees by Lebanon for a long period. Thailand made recommendations. 49. Canada expressed concern by the situation of migrant workers in Lebanon, in particular domestic workers who arrive through a sponsorship system prone to abuse by employers.  It highlighted the moratorium on the death penalty but noted that there have been new convictions to the capital punishment and called Lebanon not to execute these penalties.  It referred to the reports on the use of torture.  Canada made recommendations. 50. Russian Federation supported the measures that were taken by Lebanon and aimed at strengthening state institutions, further stabilising political situation and ensuring full control by the Government over its entire territory. It also noted a decision adopted on the removal of the limitations on the professional activities of the political refugees. Russian Federation made a recommendation. 51. Yemen noted that Lebanon was a tribune for freedom and that Beirut hosted a number of international human rights activities on human rights, although Lebanon had suffered from the Israeli occupation and the resulting refugee problem as well as wars, the last of which was in 2006. Lebanon had played a leading role in the region in adopting legislation on human rights, such as the Labour Law, as amended in 2010. Yemen was convinced that Lebanon would take further efforts to ensure a decent life for Palestinian refugees. 52. Syria welcomed Lebanon's commitment to respect all the international Human Rights instruments in a way to preserve human dignity, equality and social justice, and to improve living conditions and foster stability. Unfortunately, the establishment of Israel and its forceful displacement of millions of Palestinians from their lands, depriving them of their right of return,5 and the recurring aggression and horrific massacres by Israel, have led to a large number of deaths and injuries, in addition to the grave destruction in the infrastructure, and the spread of 2 million Israeli cluster bombs in Lebanese lands. All this led to depriving the Lebanese citizens of their rights to life, housing and food. The United Nations described these aggressions as a flagrant violation of human rights.678 53. Slovakia acknowledged Lebanon’s efforts to improve the human rights situation. It welcomed a de facto moratorium on executions since 2004 and acknowledged the recent efforts towards the abolishment of the death penalty. Slovakia referred to concerns expressed by the UN bodies about the reported ill-treatment and practices of torture as well as about a low minimum age of criminal responsibility. It made recommendations. 54. Belgium remarked that the situation of human rights had progressively improved in the last five years.  It regretted that the death penalty was still in force despite a moratorium and asked about the situation of the bill introduced to abolish the death penalty.  Belgium remained concerned by the persistence of acts of torture as well as for the situation of refugees.  It made recommendations. 55. The United States recognised measures taken by Lebanon to improve its human rights situation. It welcomed Lebanon’s efforts, including the intention to establish an independent national human rights institution. It remained concerned that Lebanese women were inequitably represented in the government and that refugees lacked basic rights to move freely within the country. It noted that some forms of torture were not criminalised. It expressed disappointment that the Lebanese report unfairly criticized Israel and referred to it in inappropriate language. It made recommendations. 56. Kuwait welcomed Lebanon’s achievements in protecting human rights in spite of the crises and repeated Israeli aggressions.  Kuwait noted that Lebanon had made efforts to protect human rights by respecting the rights enshrined in its Constitution, in national legislation and in international instruments.  Kuwait made recommendations. 57. Australia, while recognising the current moratorium on the use of the death penalty, was concerned that the death penalty remained in law. It remained also concerned by reports of a high number of working children. Australia called for the prompt passing of a new Family Violence Bill which would strengthen reporting on, and investigations of, incidents of family violence and increase protections for victims. It made recommendations. 58. The United Arab Emirates appreciated the Constitution’s provisions, which ensure respect for human rights and freedoms in line with international human rights instruments. It commended measures taken in the area of social, economic and cultural rights, in particular through the 2007 reform programme, which contained ambitious goals for 5 	Israel noted that the issue under discussion at this meeting was the human rights situation in Lebanon and not the state of Israel. Therefore Israel requested that the comments of the Syrian representative just made be struck from the working group report. 6 	Israel reiterated its objection and stated that if the representative of Syria insisted on talking about occupation, they would be interested to learn about the Syrian occupation in Lebanon. 7 	The United States noted that the UPR was a mechanism to evaluate the human rights situations in given countries and that unfortunately the discussion had moved into a different direction. It took great issue with delegations using this forum to question the status of Israel or to bring any outside issues that were not relevant to the UPR of Lebanon, and requested that discussion follow along those lines. 8 	Lebanon also took the floor and noted that what was being discussed in terms of the impact of the Israeli aggression against Lebanon was closely related to the exercise of human rights in Lebanon in terms of the victims and killings resulting from this aggression. Therefore, those who would like to speak about the Israeli aggression should not be prevented from taking the floor. economic growth and the creation of employment opportunities, protection of vulnerable groups, improvement in education and health services and achieving greater equality among different regions.  UAE made recommendations. 59. Italy commended Lebanon for undertaking measures to improve the human rights situation despite prolonged political instability. Italy appreciated that Lebanon had applied a de facto moratorium on executions, but noted that the draft law to abolish the death penalty had not been approved yet. Italy encouraged Lebanon to amend discriminatory provisions in personal status laws to ensure that women are treated equally in issues related to child custody, inheritance and divorce. It made a recommendation. 60. Sri Lanka welcomed measures taken by Lebanon to address problems related to migrant workers, inter alia through the Aliens Act and mandatory employment contracts, and efforts to a unified insurance contract to protect foreign labour. Sri Lanka also noted that Lebanon was in the process to provide free education up to the age of 12 and to extend the age of compulsory schooling to 15. It made recommendations. 61. Finland took note of the amendments of the Labour Law which aimed to enlarge the rights of the Palestinian refugees to work and encouraged Lebanon to carry out further reforms to improve the situation of Palestinian refugees in enjoying their right to work. Finland asked about the measures that were taken to enhance the prerequisites of the Palestinian refugees to increase their standard of living. Finland made recommendations. 62. Ireland noted the important progress in human rights area, including the de facto moratorium on the use of the death penalty. Ireland noted that the legislation did not criminalize all forms of torture and asked if Lebanon consider reviewing the definition of torture of the Penal Code and enacting legislation for stricter sentences for the act of torture. It made recommendations. 63. Referring to the situation of undocumented Palestinian refugees, the head of delegation noted that many had had no documents at the time they entered the territory after the 1970ies. Lebanon had received ten percent of all Palestinian refugees and could not bear the burden of an increased number of refugees alone, but would seek to address this problem in a humanitarian fashion.  Pressure was being exerted to permit Palestinian refugees to return to Lebanon if they applied for European refugee status. 64. The definition of torture would be brought in line with international standards and sentences for the crime of torture be increased accordingly. The Ministry of Justice had drafted a law to establish an independent national mechanism for the prevention of torture. The new criminal procedure code enshrines rights for accused and convicted persons, who were for instance entitled to medical attention after 24 hours of detention.   65. Concerning torture in arrest and detention centres, recommendations had been made based on those of the Sub-Committee on the Prevention of Torture, in order to guarantee the rights of persons arrested and detained and in order to monitor and prevent any violations. Access to detention facilities had been granted to delegates of the ICRC and the Sub-Committee during its recent visit in May 2010. Training was provided to the military, and a department for the monitoring of violations of international humanitarian law by the armed forced had been created. 66. The Internal Security Forces were an official law enforcement agency. A Code of Conduct was in the final stage of approval. Lebanon benefited from the experience of other countries and from direct cooperation with OHCHR in Beirut, as well as from consultations with civil society organizations. Human rights were taught to all police academy students. Recently, a Committee had been created, which included many officers of the Internal Security Forces, to monitor torture in all detention centres, conduct visits and prepare for the creation of a national mechanism for the prevention of torture in line with article 17 of OPCAT. 67. Until today, 2,000 identification documents had been granted to Palestinian refugees, although some possessed refugee documents issued by other Arab countries. Lebanon was currently examining another 1,500 requests. The identity documents provided refugees with freedom of movement within Lebanon. In exceptional cases travel documents were issued. 68. In 2005, Lebanon acceded to the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children and adopted the necessary legislation to prosecute those crimes. A National Committee headed by a judge from the Ministry of Justice had been established to prevent trafficking. A draft law on trafficking in persons was before Parliament. Training seminars for law enforcement officers were organized and Lebanon participated at trainings at the regional and international level. 69. Regarding domestic workers, it was noted that their number exceeded a hundred thousand. A committee under the supervision of the Ministry of Labour with the participation of the Ministry of Social Affairs, the Internal Security Forces and the Ministry of Justice had been established. Unified contracts for domestic workers had also been issued. One holiday per week was applied and medical insurance coverage was mandatory. The Minister of Labour was in the process of laying down a new framework for employment agencies and a law for domestic workers, prescribing the number of working hours and weekly holidays, amongst other conditions. In March 2010, certain restrictions had been imposed on employment agencies to prevent abuse of foreign workers, and awareness raising campaigns had bee launched. 70. France recognized the courageous debate that has taken place in Lebanon regarding the abolition of the death penalty.  It expressed concerns at the situation of refugees, domestic workers and Lebanon’s obligations to prevent torture.  France made recommendations.  71. Nicaragua stated that Lebanon had suffered for decades from invasions and aggressions by Israel, involving indiscriminate use of force, which had produced political, social and economic instability.  Despite this situation, Lebanon had achieved a high level of democratization and representation of all religious communities in political life. Nicaragua recognized the progress achieved in the area of human rights and the Lebanon’s cooperation with the UN human rights system.  It made recommendations. 72. The United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland encouraged Lebanon to fully involve civil society in the follow-up to the review and in the development of the National Strategic Plan on human rights. It welcomed the draft law on the abolition of the death penalty, but was concerned that it had not yet passed. The United Kingdom welcomed human rights training for security forces but expressed concern about continued allegations of torture. It raised concern about the situation of Palestinian refugees. It made recommendations. 73. Turkey noted with satisfaction the fact that Lebanon was a party to international human rights treaties and their protocols. It positively noted Lebanon’s efforts that were undertaken to establish the National Commission on Lebanese women, High Council on the Rights of the Child and the Commission on the persons with disabilities.  Turkey asked for more information on the Commission on the education for children with special needs. It welcomed the existence of a dynamic civil society and the initiative to establish an independent national human rights institution. Turkey made a recommendation. 74. Spain noted Lebanon’s commitment to democracy and human rights, evidenced by the ratification of the majority of the core international conventions and the establishment of a legal and institutional framework for their protection and promotion. It also remarked the Government’s will to establish a national human rights institution and the fact that Lebanon was the first country in the region to ratify OP-CAT.  Spain made recommendations. 75. Norway acknowledged Lebanon’s efforts to improve the human rights situation. Norway noted that migrant workers did not fall under the protection of the Labour Law, and were vulnerable to poor working conditions. Norway commended Lebanon for the draft law which would allow Lebanese women to pass on their nationality to their children and foreign spouses.  Norway made recommendations. 76. Germany enquired about the establishment of a prevention mechanism as required by OP-CAT and number of investigation on cases of enforced disappearances and torture. Germany also asked for information on the implementation of CRC’s recommendation to ensure that Lebanese mothers have the right to confer Lebanese citizenship to their children. Germany made recommendations. 77. Cote d’Ivoire noted with appreciation Lebanon’s initiatives to protect human rights and dignity.  It called for the strengthening of the national institutions charged with human rights and encouraged Lebanon to ratify those instruments to which it is not yet a party. It also encouraged Lebanon to call for the assistance of the international community to better comply with its international human rights commitments.  Cote d’Ivoire made recommendations. 78. In concluding remarks, the head of the delegation stated that Lebanon alone could not provide solutions to improve the conditions of Palestinian refugees and that it could not replace UNRWA. He called on all delegations to consider the possibility to strengthen their support to UNRWA and recalled that the fundamental objective was the return of the Palestinian refugees to their homeland. 79. Lebanon was at the cross-roads between East and West and aimed to build bridges and be a model of development in the region for the better promotion and protection of human rights while maintaining its specificities. II. Conclusions and/or recommendations 80. The recommendations formulated during the interactive dialogue/listed below have been examined by Lebanon and enjoy the support of Lebanon: 80.1. Consider becoming a party to the human rights instruments it has not yet ratified. (Cote d’Ivoire); 80.2. Consider ratification of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (Mexico); Consider ratification of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (Turkey); 80.3. Ratify the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (Algeria); 80.4. Expedite the necessary process to ratify the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and step up its efforts to address specific needs of persons with disabilities (Thailand); 80.5. Ratify the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, signed in 2007 (Spain); 80.6. Ratify the UNESCO Convention on the Protection and Promotion of Diversity of the Cultural Expressions (Armenia); 80.7. Consider requesting the international community all necessary aid and assistance that will allow it to better fulfill its international obligations in the domain of human rights (Cote d’Ivoire); 80.8. Strengthen the institutional framework in the human rights area, including through the establishment of a national human rights institution in accordance with the Paris Principles (Egypt); 80.9. Establish a national human rights commission accredited by the International Coordinating Committee (Algeria); Establish a National Commission on Human Rights in accordance with the Paris Principles (Greece); Establish a national human rights institution so as to promote human rights and address the many challenges mentioned by Lebanon in its national report (Sudan); 80.10. Proceed with the establishment of a general directorate for human rights in the Ministry of Justice, on the basis of the draft law prepared for this purpose (Saudi Arabia); 80.11. Successfully implement the important initiative of the National Human Rights Action Plan (Russian Federation); 80.12. Continue its efforts in addressing the problem of missing persons (Greece); 80.13. Amend the relevant legislation to bring the definition of torture in line with the Convention against Torture (Netherlands); Enact domestic legislation to incorporate the Convention against Torture into Lebanese law (Ireland); 80.14. Incorporate the provisions of the UN Convention against Torture into domestic laws, by inter alia reviewing the definition of torture (Germany);80.15. Criminalise all forms of torture and ill- treatment (Netherlands); Expeditiously amend its Penal Code to criminalise all forms of torture and ill-treatment and ensure that all allegations for such violations are credibly and promptly investigated and those responsible are brought to justice in accordance to international fair trial standards (Slovakia); Amend the Penal Code to criminalize all forms of torture and Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment comprised in the Convention against Torture (Belgium); 80.16. Continue its efforts to prevent and properly criminalize torture and ill-treatment by state agents; investigate, appropriately prosecute and punish those responsible; and compensate the victims (Spain); 80.17. Establish a national mechanism for the prevention of torture, to which it committed itself by signing the Optional Protocol of the Convention against Torture in 2008 (Canada); Establish a national mechanism for the prevention of torture, in line with the Optional Protocol to CAT (Belgium); 80.18. Establish a legal and institutional framework consistent with the international standards on combating the trafficking of persons to effectively address this problem (Nicaragua); 80.19. Strengthen its efforts to deal with human trafficking offences through studying international best practice and developing domestic legislation in conformity with international standards, establishing as appropriate institutions and agencies and strengthening cooperation with international organizations and bodies (Iran); 80.20. Adopt amendments to the Labour Code regarding the sale and trafficking of children (Poland); Implement amendments to the Labour Code to strengthen legal measures to combat the sale and trafficking of children (Australia); 80.21. Consider the creation of additional national mechanisms to promote and protect human rights of vulnerable groups especially women, children, and people with disabilities (Iran); 80.22. Adopt the draft law on protection of women from domestic violence as soon as possible, and ensure its effective implementation (Norway); Pass legislation, namely the Family Violence Bill, to strengthen reporting on, and investigations of, incidents of family violence and increase protections for victims (Australia); 80.23. Adopt and implement the bill for the protection of women against domestic violence, mentioned in its national report, in order to criminalize domestic violence, and implement concrete measures to punish the aggressors (Mexico); 80.24. Develop a comprehensive policy at the national level, consistent with the provisions of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, with the view to achieving gender equality and to combat gender violence (Spain); 80.25. Strengthen its efforts to eliminate discrimination against women in law and practice (Norway); 80.26. Continue endowing its National Commission for Women Affairs with public policy making and decision making powers (Nicaragua); 80.27. Finalize the national action plan on education for all and improve the quality of education (Qatar); 80.28. Continue efforts to counter the brain drain to foreign countries and strengthen standards of professional education related to the main economic activities in the country (Kuwait); 80.29. Expand opportunities for training and awareness-raising in the area of human rights for members of the security forces (Saudi Arabia); 80.30. Reinforce its efforts to regulate labor relations in a framework that safeguards dignity and rights and is consistent with international standards, in particular with regard to ancillary or domestic workers (Iran); 80.31. Develop appropriate legal frameworks for the enjoyment of the right to work and to just and favourable conditions of work to all migrant workers especially domestic workers (Brazil); 80.32. That amendments to the Labour Law and the Social Security Law granting Palestinian refugees the right to work be made operational as soon as possible (Norway); 80.33. Seek international assistance in the provision of basic services to the refugees (Pakistan); Continue to strive to obtain international assistance and technical advice to face the pressures in connection with the reception and hosting of refugees, and in this regard strengthen cooperation with relevant international organizations (Egypt); 80.34. Step up its efforts, with the continued cooperation and assistance by the UNHCR and relevant stakeholders, in addressing the protracted refugee situation (Thailand); 80.35. Continue efforts to ensure mutual understanding and peaceful interaction between all segments of Lebanese society (Qatar); 80.36. Take measures for the submission of overdue periodic reports under the treaties and covenants to which Lebanon has become a party (Oman); 80.37. Explore the possibility of establishing national-level coordination mechanism to assess and monitor implementation of the Government’s treaty obligations (Malaysia); 80.38. Submit as soon as possible its initial report to CAT (Belgium); 80.39. Ensure that education covers all areas of the country, including the living areas of refugees, bearing in mind that the mandate of the UNRWA covers the educational needs of Palestinian refugees (Yemen); 80.40. Expedite their consultation on the bill to grant domestic workers annual leave and provide cooperation with social workers to monitor their working conditions (Sri Lanka); 80.41. Regulate labour relations with special reference to ancillary or domestic workers (Sri Lanka); 81. The following recommendations enjoy the support of Lebanon which considers that they are already implemented or in the process of implementation: 81.1. Continue efforts to strengthen human rights (Tunisia); 81.2. Continue its efforts to maintain the accomplishments already made in the field of human rights (Bangladesh); 81.3. Continue the search for appropriate solutions to the challenges outlined in the report and with which citizens are faced with regard to the full enjoyment of basic political, economic, social and cultural rights (Kuwait); 81.4. Take all necessary measures to stop acts of torture and Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment (Belgium); 81.5. Accelerate the establishment of an independent national mechanism to visit prisons (France); 81.6. Continue efforts to combat human trafficking (Bahrain); 81.7. Continue efforts to ensure protection for the victims of human trafficking (Jordan); 81.8. Continue with endeavours to accelerate the ongoing process of creating additional mechanism to protect human rights and to further the efforts in the field of combating human trafficking (Sri Lanka); 81.9. Continue to guarantee freedom of expression creating additional conditions for its fulfilment (Armenia); 81.10. Further pursue its efforts to ensure the enjoyment of economic, social and cultural rights (Egypt); 81.11. Continue its policies and programmes to improve the efficiency and quality of basic social services such as health and education for its citizens (Pakistan); 81.12. Continue applying the strategies and plans for the socio-economic development of the country (Cuba); Continue consolidating social programs and measures adopted to date, that are key in fighting poverty and social exclusion, with actions that increase the provision of social services, giving priority to the most deprived sectors of society, to advance in the achievement of the highest attainable level of wellbeing for its people (Venezuela); 81.13. Further strengthen the protection of rights of vulnerable groups, like children, women, migrant workers and persons with disabilities (Bangladesh); 81.14. Continue efforts for the advancement of women and their participation in public life, and fight violence against women (Algeria); 81.15. Continue efforts for the empowerment of women in society (Bahrain); Further pursue its efforts for the empowerment of women (Syrian Arab Republic); 81.16. Establish laws and cultivate processes and institutions to protect women’s rights, foster women’s political participation, and ensure equitable representation of their interests and concerns (United States); 81.17. Exert further efforts to adopt the draft law submitted to parliament on full equality between women and men in the area of social insurance and tax law, the draft law on the lifting of restrictions on the assets of wives whose spouses are declared bankrupt, and the draft law on the protection of women from domestic violence (Sudan); 81.18. Accelerate plans for the adoption and implementation of a national strategy for children (Egypt); 81.19. Improve the quality of public education in order to preserve the excellent standards which have prevailed in Lebanon for decades at the different levels of education (Yemen); 81.20. Strengthen capacity-building in the area of human rights and raise the level of awareness with regard to these rights (Kuwait); 81.21. Continue efforts in connection with the integration of disabled children in formal education as far as possible, in accordance with an inclusive educational approach (Qatar); 81.22. Intensify efforts to spread a culture of human rights through educational curricula and awareness-raising campaigns (Saudi Arabia); 81.23. Continue applying the programs and measures aimed at guaranteeing health and education of quality for its citizens (Cuba); 81.24. Continue efforts to address the problems in connection with domestic workers with a view to increasing protections for this vulnerable group (Algeria); Establish mechanisms for monitoring the employment of domestic workers (Norway); 81.25. Strengthen measures to fight child labour within the framework of the national strategy to combat child labour (Algeria); Further pursue its efforts to combat child labour (Jordan); Intensify efforts to combat child labour (United Arab Emirates); 81.26. Continue to call on the international community and donor countries to finance projects such as the initiative launched by the Government in 2006 to improve the lives of the Palestinian refugees and the living conditions in camps, and similar initiatives to ensure a life in dignity for Palestinian refugees until the time of their return to their Palestinian homeland, in cooperation with the international community (Sudan); 81.27. Continue seeking technical and financial assistance for demining activities, given that children continue to be among the most vulnerable sections of Lebanese society particularly in terms of their exposure to explosive remnants of war (Malaysia); 81.28. Continue cooperation with the human rights mechanisms (United Arab Emirates). 82. The recommendations below did not enjoy the support of Lebanon: 82.1. Ratify the optional protocols to ICESCR and ICCPR and the optional protocols to CEDAW and the one concerning children in armed conflict, signed in 2007 (Spain); 82.2. Accede to the 1951 Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees and to its additional Protocol, and ensure that these instruments are implemented at the national level (Belgium); 82.3. Consider lifting its reservations to CEDAW (Norway); Withdraw all reservations to CEDAW which undermine the compliance of its obligations or the purpose of the treaty (Spain); 82.4. Introduce a de jure moratorium on executions until the government abolishes the death penalty (Belgium); 82.5. Deepen the process to abolish the death penalty by implementing a de jure moratorium on the use of death penalty and subsequently by abolishing it permanently; (France); 82.6. Impose a moratorium on capital punishment and commute existing death sentences to imprisonment terms with a view to abolish the capital punishment entirely (Slovakia); 82.7. Abolish the death penalty and consider the ratification of the Second Optional Protocol to ICCPR (Belgium); 82.8. Abolish the death penalty by adopting, promptly, the draft law on the abolition of the death penalty, and ratify the Second Optional Protocol to the ICCPR (United Kingdom); Accede to the Second optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, aimed at abolishing the death penalty, and take the necessary steps to remove the death penalty from Lebanon’s justice system (Australia); 82.9. Adopt, as soon as possible, the bill to abolish the death penalty; meanwhile maintain the current de facto moratorium and introduce a de jure moratorium until the permanent abolition of the death penalty goes into effect (Spain); 82.10. Proceed to abolish the death penalty from its penal code (Ireland); Eliminate the death penalty from its national legislation (Canada); 82.11. Adopt officially General Assembly resolution 62/149 on a moratorium on the death penalty and ratify the second optional protocol to ICCPR, as important steps towards abolishing capital punishment (Italy); 82.12. Abolish the death penalty (Germany); 82.13. Continue the reforms already accomplished by withdrawing the reservation to article 22 of the Convention against Torture (France); 82.14. End the prerogatives of the Ministry of Defence and Military Courts to detain and to charge civilians respectively (Germany); 82.15. Raise the minimum age of criminal responsibility to comply with international standards (Slovakia); 82.16. Continue to address the issue of street children by adopting a comprehensive national strategy to provide these children with official documents and adequate assistance, including recovery and social reintegration services (Poland); 82.17. Amend the law on citizenship in such a way that ensures that all Lebanese women, regardless of the nationality of their husband, can pass on their citizenship to their children and husbands (Netherlands); 82.18. That the proposed draft law which would allow Lebanese women to pass on their nationality to their children and foreign spouses be adopted as soon as possible (Norway); Enact legislation to grant Lebanese nationality to the spouses and children of Lebanese women (United Kingdom); Amend its law on nationality to enable Lebanese women to confer their nationality to their children (Canada); 82.19. Amend personal status laws so as to further ensure women’s rights, in particular with regard to marriage dissolution, child custody and inheritance (Brazil); 82.20. Amend the personal status laws in line with CEDAW, to ensure that women are treated in the same way as men in issues related to child custody, inheritance and divorce (Netherlands); 82.21. Decriminalise homosexuality and ensure non-discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation and gender identity (Norway); 82.22. Continue its efforts in reviewing its labour law with a view to including migrant workers in its scope (Norway); 82.23. That the current sponsorship system, ‘kafala’, be revoked and replaced with regulations in accordance with international standards (Norway); 82.24. Extend the protection of the Labour Code to domestic workers (Poland); 82.25. Review the system of sponsorship for domestic workers in order to protect them against abuse from employers (Canada); 82.26. Extend the protection of the labour law to domestic workers and ensure that the rules concerning the right to stay do not put them in a situation of dependence from their employers (France); 82.27. Accelerate procedures at the Ministry of Labour to complete implementing regulations to facilitate the employment of Palestinians and open access to employment in all liberal professions (Palestine); 82.28. Lift the obstacles to employ Palestinian refugees, give access to employment to the Palestinian refugees, give access to free education to all children of refugees and enable universal health care (France); 82.29. Guarantee freedom of movement for the Palestinian refugees and commit to the improvement of their employment (France); 82.30. Grant Palestinian refugees the freedom of movement and in particular facilitate the free entry into and exit from Nahr el Bared camp (Norway); 82.31. Issue permits to refugees in Lebanon to allow them freedom of movement and employment, including the right to work in professions that require syndicate membership, and without onerous renewal or fee restrictions (United States); 82.32. Grant Palestinian refugees the right to own land (Norway); Take legislative action to ensure the right of the Palestinian refugees to inherit and register property, including the right to own land (Finland); Amend legislation that restricts the ability of Palestinian refugees to own property, specifically the Presidential Decree of January 1969, as modified in April 2001 (Netherlands); 82.33. Resolve fully the problem of the identification documents of the Palestinian refugees and modify legislative provisions and policies that have discriminatory consequences on the Palestinian population as compared to other non-citizens (Ireland); 82.34. Further improve the enjoyment of all human rights by Palestinian refugees, granting them a legal treatment no worse than to other non-nationals, especially with regard to right to work and to freedom of movement taking into account the responsibility of the international community (Brazil); 82.35. Bridge the gaps left by the amended law on registered Palestinian Refugees, such as allowing Palestinian refugees to extract temporary work permits (Netherlands); 82.36. Take efficient measures to swiftly ameliorate the situation of Palestinian refugees including amending legislative provisions and policies that have a discriminatory effect on the Palestinian population (Finland); 82.37. Adopt the necessary laws to contribute to alleviate the socio-economic conditions of Palestinian refugees (Canada). 83. The following recommendations were rejected by Lebanon based on one or more of the following reasons: (a) not within the scope of the UPR; (b) submitted by the occupying power of Lebanese territories; (c) infringing on the sovereignty of Lebanon: 83.1. Amend all discriminatory provisions in personal status laws in particular issues related to child custody, inheritance and divorce (Israel); 83.2. Immediately implement Security Council resolutions 1559 and 1701 by disbanding and disarming all militias and armed factions, in particular Hizbullah, and restore security and stability for all residents of Lebanon (Israel); 83.3. Submit the initial report to the UN Committee against Torture (CAT), overdue since 2001 (Israel). 84. The following recommendations will be examined by Lebanon which will provide responses in due time, but no later than the 16th session of the Human Rights Council in March 2011: 84.1. Consider the ratification of the International Convention for the Protection of all Persons from Enforced Disappearance (Germany); 84.2. Ratify the Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance, signed in 2007 (Spain); 84.3. Consider ratification of the Geneva Conventions (Germany); 84.4. Establish an independent national body empowered to investigate the whereabouts of missing persons and victims of enforced disappearance, in the context of the various wars that have occurred in the country (Mexico); 84.5. Establish a process to identify the victims by setting up a DNA database, exhume mass graves and to set up a national commission on missing persons (Germany); 84.6. Criminalise all acts of torture as set forth in the Convention against Torture and adopt punishments in line with the gravity of the crime (United States); 84.7. Increase the penalty for the crime of torture from the current maximum of three years, proportional with the severity of the crime (Netherlands); 84.8. Abolish the crime of honour in its penal code and continue to take the necessary measures in order to better promote women’s rights in all spheres of the society (Greece); 84.9. Bring domestic law into full compliance with the Convention on the Rights of the Child (Poland); 84.10. Take further measures to improve the working possibilities and working conditions of the Palestinian refugees (Finland); 84.11. Strengthen efforts to assist Palestinians living in Lebanon who are lacking identity documents so that it will be possible for them to live a decent life (Palestine); 84.12. Strengthen the capacity of the Lebanese Palestinian Dialogue Commission to assist Palestinian Refugees as a step to improve the human rights and humanitarian situation for Palestinian refugees in Lebanon (United Kingdom); 84.13. Extend an open and standing invitation to the special procedures, as a gesture of Lebanon’s openness and commitment to cooperate with the human rights international mechanisms (Mexico); 84.14. Extend an open and standing invitation to the special procedures of the Human Rights Council (Spain); Issue a standing invitation to all UN special procedures (Poland). 85. All conclusions and/or recommendations contained in the present report reflect the position of the submitting State(s) and/or the State under review. They should not be construed as endorsed by the Working Group as a whole. Annex Composition of the delegation The delegation of Lebanon was headed by H.E. Ambassador William Habib, Secretary-General of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and composed of the following members: • S.E. Mme l’Ambassadeur Najla RIACHI ASSAKER, Représentant permanent du Liban - Genève • Mlle. Rana MOKADDEM, Conseiller à la Mission permanente du Liban - Genève • M. Bachir SALEH AZZAM, Premier secrétaire à la Mission permanente du Liban -Genève • M.	 Ali GHAZAWI, Directeur par intérim des Organisations Internationales, des congrès et des relations culturelles au Ministère des Affaires Etrangères – Beyrouth • M. Hassan SALEH, Premier Secrétaire au 	Ministère des Affaires Etrangères – Beyrouth • Mme. Mirna KHAWLI, Premier secrétaire au Ministère des Affaires Etrangères - Beyrouth • M. Ziad ITANI, Premier secrétaire au Ministère des Affaires Etrangères -Beyrouth • Colonel Sami KHOURY (M), Ministère de la Défense - Beyrouth • Commandant Joseph MAZLOUM (M), Ministère de la Défense - Beyrouth • Commandant Ziad KAED BAY (M), Ministère de l’Intérieur et des Municipalités  	-Direction générale des Forces de la Sécurité Intérieure - Beyrouth • Général Joumana DANIEL (Mme), Ministère de l’Intérieur et des Municipalités - Direction générale de la Sûreté générale - Beyrouth • Juge Marlène AL JORR (Mme), Ministère de la Justice - Beyrouth • Mme. Lara KARAM, Ministère de la Justice - Beyrouth • Mme. Sawsan MAHDI, Ministère des Affaires Sociales - Beyrouth • Mme. Mariam MAGHAMI, Ministère des Affaires Sociales - Beyrouth • M. Ali FAYAD, Ministère du Travail - Beyrouth • Mme. Denise DAHROUJ, Ministère du Travail – Beyrouth • M. Fadi KARAM, Comité national des affaires de la femme - Beyrouth • Dr. Fadia KIWAN (Mme), Comité national des affaires de la femme - Beyrouth 