  United Nations  A/HRC/21/3    General Assembly  Distr.: General 6 July 2012  Original: English  Human Rights Council Twenty-first session Agenda item 6 Universal Periodic Review   Report of the Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review*  * The annex to the present report is circulated as received.   Morocco Contents  Paragraphs Page   Introduction .............................................................................................................  1–4 3  I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process ................................................  5–128 3   A. Presentation by the State under review ...........................................................  5–25 3   B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review ........................  26–128 6  II. Conclusions and/or recommendations .....................................................................  129–133 15  III. Voluntary pledges and commitments ......................................................................  134 25  Annex   Composition of the delegation .........................................................................................................  26 Introduction 1. The Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review (UPR), established in accordance with Human Rights Council resolution 5/1 of 18 June 2007, held its thirteenth session from 21 May to 4 June 2012.  The review of Morocco was held at the 4th meeting,  on 22 May 2012. The delegation of Morocco was headed by Mustafa Ramid, Minister of Justice and Freedoms. At its 10th meeting held on 25 May 2012, the Working Group adopted the report on Morocco. 2. On 3 May 2012, the Human Rights Council selected the following group of rapporteurs (troika) to facilitate the review of Morocco: Burkina Faso, Bangladesh and Italy. 3. In accordance with paragraph 15 of the annex to Council resolution 5/1 and paragraph 5 of the annex to resolution 16/21, the following documents were issued for the review of Morocco:  (a) A national report submitted/written presentation made in accordance with paragraph 15 (a) (A/HRC/WG.6/13/MAR/1);  (b) A compilation prepared by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) in accordance with paragraph 15 (b) (A/HRC/WG.6/13/MAR/2);  (c) A summary prepared by OHCHR in accordance with paragraph 15 (c) (A/HRC/WG.6/13/MAR/3). 4. A list of questions prepared in advance by Denmark, Ireland, Slovenia, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Netherlands, Norway and Sweden was transmitted to Morocco through the troika. These questions are available on the extranet of the UPR.  I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process  A. Presentation by the State under review 5. The Kingdom of Morocco indicated that its national report under the universal periodic review (UPR) had been elaborated based on a participatory approach in which all the stakeholders concerned have contributed. This made it possible to grasp and appropriate the nature, foundations and goals of this mechanism. 6. Morocco renewed its commitment to continuing its cooperation with the United Nations human rights system, and openness to constructive dialogue and interaction with all its mechanisms, especially the Human Rights Council, treaty bodies and special procedures. 7. With a view to fulfilling its commitments related to the full interaction with and openness to the special procedures, Morocco received since its first periodic review the Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances, the Independent Expert on cultural rights and the Working Group on Discrimination against Women in Law and Practice. These mechanisms visited many regions of the country, and noticed on the ground the achievements made in the areas falling within their scope of work in particular, and in human rights in general. Morocco will receive a number of these mechanisms, including the Special Rapporteur on the question of torture in September 2012. Morocco reiterates its openness to all thematic special procedures of the Council, and would facilitate their work in an unimpeded and unrestricted manner. 8. Morocco has attached special importance to the implementation of the recommendations made during its first review and responded to all those which were accepted. It ratified the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD) and its Optional Protocol, the First and Second Additional Protocols to the 1949 Geneva Conventions and the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons Especially Women and Children, supplementing the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime. 9. Furthermore, Morocco has already launched the process of ratification or adhesion to the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture (OPCAT), the First Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil Political Rights, and the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women. It also signed the Third Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on communications procedure, and embarked upon procedures to ratify the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance. 10. Moreover, it withdrew its reservations to the provisions of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW), which have become obsolete given the legislative reforms made, namely the Family Law and Nationality Act. 11. Morocco ensured that the measures and actions to prevent torture were strengthened in law and practice and that prison conditions were improved. It also saw to it that the Equity and Reconciliation Commission recommendations were implemented, particularly those related to truth, individual and community reparations, as well as the judicious recommendations on institutional and legislative reforms, which were all enshrined in the new Constitution approved by popular referendum on 1 July 2011. 12. Considering the fact that some recommendations fall within the reform process, especially those related to the promotion of human rights, human rights education and training, protection of the rights of migrants and completion of the harmonization of national laws with international human rights standards, Morocco embarked on its implementation, based on strategic human rights planning, pursuant to the 1993 Vienna Conference recommendation in this regard. This concerns mainly the elaboration and start of implementation of the Platform for Promotion of the Human Rights Culture and the elaboration of the National Action Plan on Democracy and Human Rights. 13. It should be noted that attention was accorded tothe recommendation on the adherence to the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court. The new Constitution provides for the criminalization of genocide, crimes against humanity, war crimes and all systematic and serious human rights violations. In addition, several crimes provided for in the Rome Statute are included in the Moroccan draft criminal code. Curbing impunity is also considered a strategic choice, which would enable the Kingdom to adhere to the international justice system. 14. Morocco has been engaged in a comprehensive reform process which culminated in the adoption of the new Constitution, whose guiding principles are the Royal Address of King Mohammed VI dated March 6, 2011. All the concerned stakeholders were involved in this drafting process which was a major step to ensure a real and effective democratic transition. 15. Human rights are the backbone of the new Constitution. They appear in all its chapters, including its preamble which is an integral part thereof. The new Constitution enshrines the concept of participative democracy, through the broadened pluralist and citizenship participation in political life and in the management of public affairs. With a view to consolidating democracy and giving a concrete content for the human rights protection guarantees, the new Constitution outlines key provisions on the separation and balance of powers, the guarantees to entrench the independence of the judiciary and to upgrade it to a real power, the principles and rules of active and responsive citizenship, the promotion of good governance and linking responsibility with accountability. 16. The new Constitution provided for advanced regionalization, starting with the Southern Provinces, allowing the local population to manage their own affairs and enhance local democracy, as a prelude to the implementation of the autonomy statute proposed by Morocco as a political solution to the Sahara dispute. 17. Pursuant to the Constitution, Morocco witnessed in November 2011 legislative elections which were fair, free and professionally organized, according to national and international observers. As a result, a new House of Representatives was elected and a new Head of Government appointed from a political party which used to be in the opposition, in a democratic and political alternation. 18. With a view to enabling Morocco to have a coherent, modern and effective national human rights system, the institutional framework responsible for the promotion and protection of human rights was reinforced. The Advisory Council on Human Rights was upgraded to a National Human Rights Council, with a stronger mandate and as a real redress mechanism with more action through regional mechanisms for the promotion and protection of human rights. The Mediator Institution was set up and replaced the Diwan al-Madalim (Ombudsman), with broader protection and proposal-making mandate to improve the performance of administration and public facilities. Many bodies have been constitutionalized and the National Commission for International Humanitarian Law and the Interministerial Delegation for Human Rights was created. 19. Taking into account the role of the judiciary in the protection of freedoms and human rights, the Government with the support of the King has given particular attention to the reform of justice with all its components. In order to boost this project, a high instance in charge of organizing a national dialogue on a thorough and profound reform of the justice system was set up. All the parties concerned participate in this dialogue with a view to elaborating and adopting a national chart for justice. 20. Great efforts have also been made to better manage penitentiary institutions and improve their situation, in such a way as to ensure human dignity therein and increase the opportunities of training and reintegration of prisoners into society. The fact that these institutions are open to the visits of national human rights institutions has improved the situation and humanization of prisons. 21. In order to capitalize on the national gains in the areas of freedom of opinion and expression, a broad national debate on freedom of media and publishing has been launched. Morocco has also experienced broader exercise of the right of assembly and demonstration, in a context of pure political openness and democracy build-up. 22. Despite the challenges and difficulties facing the national economy due to the global economic crisis and the slowing growth of the economies of many countries worldwide, Morocco continued to fulfil its obligations arising from the implementation of economic, social, cultural and environment rights. 23. Considering the cultural diversity of Morocco, several constitutional gains have been achieved with regard to the enjoyment of cultural rights. The Amazigh language is considered as an official language of the State and a shared heritage belonging to all Moroccans, and a national council for languages and Moroccan culture is provided for. In addition, Morocco ensured that its efforts are enhanced to integrate the Amazigh and Sahrawi Hassani cultures in the areas of education, training, media, communication and cultural creativity. 24. Regarding women’s rights, Morocco has taken several measures to promote gender equality. It has combated gender-based violence and gender has been taken into account in public budgets, access to public services and facilities, and participation in the management of public affairs. In the field of group rights, several measures have been taken to ensure the rights of persons with disabilities, children, migrants and refugees. 25. Morocco underlined the importance of the progress achieved and that it would continue its efforts to accomplish further reforms in order to consolidate the rule of law and respect of all human rights. To that effect, it expected more support from the international community. Morocco hoped that this progress would be crowned by its election as a member of the Human Rights Council for the period 2014–2016.  B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review 26. During the interactive dialogue, 93 delegations made statements. Recommendations made during the dialogue are to be found in section II of the present report. 27. Sri Lanka welcomed the granting of the constitutional status to the National Human Rights Council and the adoption of the National Action Plan for Democracy and Human Rights.  It also praised Morocco for its efforts to protect the rights of women and children. Sri Lanka made recommendations. 28. Sudan appreciated the constitutional measures adopted by Morocco to strengthen the institutional framework for the promotion and protection of human rights. It welcomed the national dialogue established with NGOs dealing with human rights issues. Sudan made recommendations. 29. Swaziland commended Morocco for its comprehensive national report and for the positive developments that have occurred in that country since the adoption of its first report to the universal periodic review, as a result of a peaceful transition to a more egalitarian status quo.  Swaziland made a recommendation. 30. Sweden welcomed the political reforms that have been initiated in Morocco. It also welcomed the release of persons imprisoned for expressing opinions. It was concerned about recent measures to censor and restrict press freedom and to suppress freedom of expression via the Internet. Sweden was also concerned that people do not fully enjoy freedom of expression, association and assembly in matters pertaining to the Western Sahara. It made a recommendation. 31. Switzerland expressed concern over the persistence of violations of human rights committed by the security forces, in particular in the context of peaceful demonstrations. It referred to the work of the Equality and Reconciliation Commission and the progress made on gender equality. Switzerland made recommendations. 32. Thailand congratulated Morocco on the guarantees of human rights and fundamental freedoms in the new Constitution, ratification of international human rights instruments, withdrawal of its reservations to CEDAW, establishment of a national human rights institution and reform of justice. Thailand made recommendations. 33. Togo noted that, since the first UPR cycle, Morocco has ratified several international instruments including the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and its Optional Protocol and the OPCAT.  It noted that Morocco has also lifted its reservations on CEDAW. 34. Turkey welcomed the constitutional status awarded to the National Human Rights Council, the Office of the Ombudsman and the Economic and Social Council. It welcomed the withdrawal of certain reservations to CEDAW.  Turkey made recommendations. 35. Uganda commended Morocco on its continued dialogue with treaty bodies and special procedures. It noted the establishment of an Inter-ministerial Unit on Human Rights and a National Human Rights Council and the Office of the Ombudsman. Uganda encouraged Morocco to continue to uplift the rights of special groups such as women and migrants through its equality agenda for 2011–2015. 36. Ukraine praised Morocco’s progress in the implementation of the UPR recommendations. It inquired about Morocco’s assessment of the National Human Rights Council and its advantages as compared to its predecessor.  It also asked about its key priorities in Western Sahara. 37. United Arab Emirates asked what measures Morocco had adopted to promote a human rights culture in education, nationality and gender equality. It wished to know how Morocco envisaged disseminating and implementing the new medical assistance system. The United Arab Emirates made a recommendation. 38. United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland noted Morocco’s increased engagement with international human rights instruments. It was strongly supportive of Morocco’s internal reform process and welcomed the establishment of the National Human Rights Council in 2011. It expressed concerns over the imprisonment of journalists and students and by the long-standing detention without trial of Sahrawi detainees arrested during the Gdim Izik protests. It continued to be concerned with the human rights situation in the non-self governing territory of Western Sahara. 39. United States of America expressed concern about arrests of journalists, bloggers and artists, allegations of police brutality against peaceful demonstrators and the torture of detainees by the security forces, and failure to register civil society organizations advocating on behalf of minority populations. United States of America made recommendations. 40. Uruguay valued the new Constitution that acknowledged enforced disappearances and arbitrary detentions, the reforms on the area of transitional justice and the adoption of the National Action Plan for Democracy and Human Rights.  Uruguay made recommendations. 41. Uzbekistan asked what steps Morocco had taken to implement Millennium Development Goal 4 relating to reducing child mortality. It wished to know whether cooperation programmes with the appropriate international agencies had been developed and how the public would be informed. Uzbekistan made a recommendation. 42. Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) commended Morocco’s efforts to implement the previous UPR recommendations.  It noted the lifting of reservations to CEDAW as a positive step towards promoting gender balance.  It also noted efforts made to combat poverty. Venezuela made recommendations. 43. Viet Nam noted that the enjoyment of economic, social and cultural rights had progressively improved, but acknowledged that Morocco still faced challenges, particularly addressing vulnerable groups and the socioeconomic constraints exacerbated by the financial crisis. It made recommendations. 44. Yemen praised Morocco for its attention to UPR showing its sincerity towards United Nations mechanisms.  It noted this is the reflection of its commitment to strengthen human rights. Yemen made a recommendation. 45. Zimbabwe noted progress made in promoting and protecting the human rights of women, children, persons with disabilities and migrants. It also noted the national priorities, initiatives and commitments made by Morocco to advance human rights in line with its Constitution. Zimbabwe made recommendations. 46. Argentina congratulated Morocco on establishing the National Human Rights Council and on strengthening its mandate to enable it to promote the full exercise of human rights more extensively. Argentina made recommendations. 47. Australia commended Morocco for the explicit prohibition of torture, the commitment to fight all forms of discrimination, the recognition of Berber as an official language, and the recognition of the primacy of duly ratified international conventions over domestic law.  Australia welcomed Morocco’s withdrawal of its reservations to articles 9, paragraph  2, and 16 of CEDAW.  Australia made recommendations. 48. Austria, noting that the Special Rapporteur on question of torture would visit Morocco and the Western Sahara, enquired whether a standing invitation would be extended to all special procedures. It asked whether provisions on family inheritance would be harmonized with the Constitution. Austria made recommendations. 49. Azerbaijan congratulated Morocco for its measures to strengthen the mandate of the National Human Rights Council, to include human rights values and citizenship in school programmes, and welcomed measures improving the right of Moroccans living abroad. Azerbaijan made recommendations. 50. Bahrain commended efforts to promote the rights of persons with disabilities and requested further information on how Morocco intended to meet their needs, particularly with regard to access to employment. Bahrain made a recommendation. 51. Bangladesh welcomed the establishment of the National Human Rights Council and the Office of the Ombudsman, and the reforms undertaken for the promotion and protection of the human rights, including the reform of the justice system.  It praised the adoption of the new Constitution.  Bangladesh made a recommendation. 52. Belarus commended Morocco on progress made thus far in promoting and protecting human rights. It noted the Government’s determination to combat trafficking in persons, underpinned by the implementation of a comprehensive strategy in that regard. Belarus made recommendations. 53. Belgium referred to the progress made in equality between men and women in the new Constitution and the necessity to implement these measures in daily life. It welcomed the moratorium on the death penalty. Finally, it mentioned freedom of press. Belgium made recommendations. 54. Benin welcomed efforts to strengthen the judiciary and improve detention conditions. It noted with satisfaction the adoption of a new Constitution, which would provide an ideal framework for promoting and protecting human rights. 55. Botswana noted the establishment of the Inter-ministerial Unit on Human Rights, the National Human Rights Council and the Office of the Ombudsman. Botswana inquired about the invitations to the Working Group on Arbitrary Detention and the Special Rapporteur on Trafficking in Persons. Botswana made a recommendation. 56. Brazil welcomed steps taken to ensure women’s rights, including the withdrawal of Morocco’s reservations to CEDAW. It noted the constitutional recognition of the contribution made to Moroccan society by its many cultures and peoples. Brazil made recommendations. 57. Burkina Faso praised Morocco’s cooperation with the Human Rights Council and the universal periodic review and its adhesion to international instruments. It reiterated its desire to share best practices in the context of the UPR. 58. Canada requested information on measures to finalize the reform of the judiciary, begun in 2009, in particular the training and awareness-raising of judges and magistrates to eliminate discrimination against women in the justice system. Canada made recommendations. 59. Chad referred to Morocco’s broad consultation with national and international experts in the elaboration of the national report. It praised its strengthening of the legislative and institutional framework in particular by the elaboration of a new Constitution. Chad made a recommendation. 60. Chile, noting that Morocco had hosted the Conference of States to Combat Corruption, asked what efforts had been made by the Government to put into practice good governance in public life.  Chile made recommendations. 61. China welcomed Morocco’s accession to the CRPD and its initiatives in favour of gender equality, rights of women and children, and fight against gender-based discrimination and illiteracy.  China made a recommendation. 62. Congo welcomed Morocco’s efforts to improve human rights and its commitment to ongoing constructive dialogue with the United Nations mechanisms. The new Constitution would ensure better access to education and safeguard rights and fundamental freedoms. Congo made a recommendation. 63. Costa Rica congratulated Morocco on its efforts for the large reforms undertaken to strengthen democracy and to contribute to the respect of human rights.  It encouraged Morocco to consider the possibility of incorporating a human rights component in the United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara (MINURSO). It made recommendations. 64. Côte d’Ivoire commended Morocco on the creation of a High Authority for Audiovisual Communication to liberalize and establish regulations on audiovisual communication and guarantee political and cultural diversity. It encouraged Morocco to strengthen its reforms to ensure women’s inheritance and abolish early marriages. 65. Denmark noted the excessive use of force to disperse peaceful demonstrations.  It noted the arrest of journalists and bloggers. It regretted the arbitrary detention and attack on protesters and noted the persistence of legal and practical gender-based discrimination. Denmark made recommendations. 66. Djibouti congratulated Morocco on its efforts and progress made in promoting and protecting human rights since the first UPR cycle and in implementing the recommendations received. Djibouti made recommendations. 67. Ecuador noted the progress achieved by Morocco in the field of human rights, in particular regarding the enlargement of political participation in the electoral process.  It congratulated Morocco for the ratification of CRPD. Ecuador made recommendations. 68. Egypt welcomed measures adopted by Moroccan institutions to promote and protect human rights, particularly the rights of women and children. It also welcomed the focus on cultural rights and the right to education in the new Constitution. Egypt made recommendations. 69. Morocco thanked all delegates who paid tribute to its efforts, made recommendations or observations in order to improve conditions regarding respect of human rights in the country. It reaffirmed the fact that the Kingdom has great ambitions to guarantee human rights as defined on the universal level and was trying to include all its institutions to consecrate these rights despite difficulties and obstacles. It is true that Morocco was passing through real process of transition to democracy. In the context of this transition and for the first time, a constitutional document was issued, including rights and freedoms. There is a Parliament which was democratically elected. This election was observed by international and local observers. A Government of coalition was formed after the opposition won parliamentary election. Also, for the first time, Morocco also has a judicial authority, which is headed by the Higher Council for judicial authorities. The Constitution provides that there should be no interference in cases brought before the law and the judge should not receive any instruction, or subject to any pressure. Other fundamental freedoms are also protected. 70. On the question regarding freedom of the press, Morocco indicated that there was no control of journalists, who carry out their function in total freedom. Regarding the law on journalism, Morocco confirmed that the existing law would be amended, in particular cancelling any punishment through imprisonment. It also indicated that during the past four years, only two journalists had been detained. As regards the freedom of demonstration, it is guaranteed by the law. Unemployed young people who seek employment, sometimes obstruct traffic or occupy public buildings, in which cases intervention become imperative. Morocco tries to limit these interventions. 71. Morocco recognized the importance of education and the training programmes for law enforcement officials. Regarding the criminalization of enforced disappearance or to limit this phenomenon, the Equity and Reconciliation Commission has carried out important role during the transitional period and has already recommended that Morocco put an end to cases of enforced disappearance, which is prohibited by the Constitution, article 23, and the law. Morocco has also signed the International Convention on Enforced Disappearance which should be ratified soon by the Parliament. Morocco signed the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court in 2000; it was trying to prepare all the necessary papers to incorporate these prohibitions in national law. Since 1993, no capital punishment has been carried out. There is also a draft law which aims at reducing the number of crimes punished with the death penalty. 72. Among best practices of the national human rights institution are the pluralist composition of the institution, with reinforcement of its mandate, particularly in the field of the protection of human rights, complaints are dealt with, there are regional mechanisms. It has become a constitutional institution, and therefore would have to submit annual reports to the Parliament. Morocco has done strategic planning in the field of human rights in line with the 1993 World Human Rights Conference. The national institution coordinates between different sectors of the civil society and different plans, particularly those concerning vulnerable groups. Some rights are now enshrined in the Constitution such as the right to access to water, environment and sustainable development and the Government has drafted a Charter in this regard. 73. The mandate of MINURSO is defined by the Security Council resolutions, starting from resolution 690 (1991) continuing to its resolution 2044 (2012), and the agreements between Morocco and MINURSO namely: supervision of the ceasefire and assistance in implementing programmes related to demining and confidence building measures. The recent resolutions are clear about the mandate of the MINURSO. With regard to human rights, resolution 2044 (2012) welcomed the opening of two National Councils on Human Rights Commissions in the Sahara, and the commitment to open further to all current special procedures of the United Nations Human Rights Council. 74. The law forbids any violence against detainees. Coerced confession obtained through torture is inadmissible in court and is a crime. There are mechanisms for the prevention of torture and detainees have the possibility of access to a lawyer in the first hour of the detention. As of 2008, members of the prosecution increased their visits to prisons. Complaints of torture are investigated and prosecuted. Juvenile delinquents are judged by special judges in juvenile justice. There has been a national strategy to combat violence against women in force since 2002. Laws were revised to provide greater protection for women. 75. The right to housing is enshrined under the new Constitution. Morocco undertook sustained efforts to ensure access to housing for the greatest possible number of people and low–income households. The Government is intensifying and diversifying housing by carrying out dedicated programmes in order to eradicate slums by 2016 through the construction of social housing, low and middle-cost houses. There is also a programme combating exclusion in the slums. It’s a public/private partnership with local communities and Ministries involved. The national human development programme is in its second phase, including combating poverty in rural and urban areas based on a participatory philosophy, active solidarity, the gender perspective and a constant desire to ensure that activities are located in their own territories, in particular where wealth is created. Morocco is achieving outstanding results, particularly for the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). 76. Estonia commended Morocco for ratifying the First Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR) and for introducing a National Plan of Action in the area of democracy and human rights. It welcomed the withdrawal of its reservations to two articles of CEDAW although concerned that discrimination against women still existed.  Estonia made recommendations. 77. Ethiopia, commending Morocco on its efforts and commitment to improving human rights in its country, asked whether the new Constitution gave special attention to the promotion of local languages and what measures had been adopted in that regard. 78. France praised the adoption of the new Constitution in 2011. It noted with satisfaction the national dialogue that has been initiated to set up a new Press Code. It referred to the moratorium on the death penalty since 1993.  France made recommendations. 79. Germany appreciated Morocco’s commitment to implementing the recommendations of the first UPR cycle, and especially legislative reforms in the area of family law, contributing to the realization of gender equality. Germany asked what plans exist to enact legislation defining the crime of torture consistent with article 1 of the Convention against Torture (CAT) and to increase accountability mechanisms, and if there are any plans to improve prison conditions. It thanked Morocco for its commitment to and excellent cooperation within the “Blue Group” to promote the human right to safe drinking water and sanitation. Germany made recommendations. 80. Ghana welcomed Morocco’s reform efforts including inter-alia the adoption of a new Constitution and the development of national human rights institutions. It urged the expeditious process towards the ratification of ILO Conventions No. 189, 169 and 87. 81. Greece asked what further action Morocco intended to take to combat torture and ill-treatment and to bring the perpetrators to justice. It also asked whether further programmes would be implemented to reduce school dropouts. Greece made recommendations. 82. Guinea praised the progress made in the protection and promotion of human rights. It referred to the new Constitution and its engagement in human rights. It encouraged and invited Morocco to share its best practices and pursue its efforts in the implementation of the reforms. 83. The Holy See highlighted the challenges still facing Morocco, including reducing poverty and child, infant and maternal mortality, providing electricity and drinking water in rural areas and enhancing education, employment and housing. The Holy See made recommendations. 84. Hungary inquired about the measures envisaged in the National Action Plan to ensure the rights of persons with disabilities. Hungary welcomed the de facto moratorium on the death penalty since 1993 but remained concerned that detainees were still on death row and death sentences continued to be imposed. Hungary made recommendations. 85. India welcomed efforts to modernize the criminal justice system, the introduction of strategic planning in human rights, and measures to promote and protect the rights of migrant workers, especially the importance attached to the issue as a country of origin, transit and destination. 86. Indonesia commended Morocco for its accession to and ratification of various international instruments and the adoption of the National Action Plan for Democracy and Human Rights. It praised its policies with regard to migrants. Indonesia made recommendations. 87. Iraq commended Morocco on the adoption of its new Constitution and its efforts in and commitment to promoting and protecting human rights, not least the withdrawal of its reservations to CEDAW. Iraq made recommendations. 88. Ireland noted that the Family Code stipulated that the legal age of marriage was 18 and welcomed the changes in the Constitution regarding gender equality.   It highlighted Morocco’s commitment to provide unimpeded access to all special procedures but remained concerned about the human rights situation in Western Sahara. Ireland made recommendations. 89. Italy welcomed the latest political developments in Morocco and commended it on its de facto moratorium on capital punishment. It requested information on the implementation of the “Equality Agenda for 2011–2015”. Italy made recommendations. 90. Jordan noted the positive developments that have occurred in Morocco in the human rights field and welcomed the implementation of initiatives on good governance and the dialogue between the Government and human rights NGOs.  Jordan made recommendations. 91. Kuwait was impressed by Morocco’s efforts in human rights and to ensure the rule of law and the independence of the judiciary. It requested more information on the national development initiative and its impact on the citizens concerned. Kuwait made recommendations. 92. Latvia noted that Morocco had expressly stated its openness to cooperation with the Human Rights Council special procedures.  It thanked Morocco for their constructive engagement in the UPR process.  Latvia made recommendations. 93. Lebanon welcomed the adoption by Morocco of a new Constitution, the ratification of number of human rights treaties and steps taken to ensure gender equality. Lebanon made a recommendation. 94. Lesotho noted the measures taken by Morocco to promote and protect the right to health and the economic, social and cultural rights. It also commended Morocco for its constructive participation in the UPR process. 95. Libya welcomed concrete steps taken toward strengthening and protecting human rights, particularly, the ratification of number of human rights treaties and the withdrawal of reservations to CEDAW. 96. Madagascar noted Morocco’s interest expressed for human rights and fundamental questions. It congratulated Morocco’s continued mobilization and active involvement in the promotion of the UPR mechanism. 97. Malaysia welcomed the recent legislative reform and socio-economic development measures. It noted Morocco’s increased investment in health, education, job creation, poverty eradication and social services, and its proactive stance in advancing the rights of women and children. Malaysia made recommendations. 98. The Maldives welcomed Morocco’s great step forward with the adoption of a new Constitution dedicated to democratic principles. It praised Morocco for its commitment towards vulnerable groups such as women, children and persons with disabilities. The Maldives made recommendations. 99. Mali thanked Morocco for hosting UPR seminars in 2008 and 2010. It particularly appreciated the efforts of Morocco to strengthen its institutional framework for the promotion and protection of human rights and its justice system. It also welcomed its efforts to combat poverty. 100. Mauritania commended Morocco’s achievements in promoting civil, political, economic, social and cultural rights of its citizens. Morocco promotes tolerance at the international level and has reached cultural heritage. Mauritania called on the Council to strengthen the leading experience of Morocco in the field of human rights. 101. Mauritius particularly commended the creation of the Office of the Ombudsman and the National Human Rights Council. It hoped that Morocco would continue on its promising path, notably through the promotion of gender equality and education at all levels, including adult education. 102. Mexico recognized efforts made by Morocco, including ratification of the CPRD and its Optional Protocol and commitment to submit its initial report to the Committee of Migrant Workers. Despite these achievements, Mexico noted that challenges remained. It made recommendations. 103. Monaco congratulated Morocco on its reforms leading to the adoption of the new Constitution, particularly the creation of the National Human Rights Council, ratification of the six international instruments, and the adoption of the National Action Plan for Democracy and Human Rights. Monaco made recommendations. 104. Mozambique commended Morocco for the ratification of Convention of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, its Optional Protocols and the Protocol to Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons. It encouraged Morocco to develop legislative measures on the right to refugees. 105. Nepal appreciated the strengthening of the normative and institutional framework, reform of the judicial system, promotion of civil, political, social, cultural and environmental rights, development and consolidation of the participatory approach and gender mainstreaming efforts. Nepal made recommendations. 106. The Netherlands expressed its concern over cases of rape of young girls and the fact that the Moroccan Penal Code allegedly enabled perpetrators to escape criminal conviction by marrying their young victims. The Netherlands noted reports that recent publications from respected newspapers have been banned from Morocco. The Netherlands made a recommendation. 107. Nicaragua particularly welcomed the creation of National Human Rights Council and noted with satisfaction the efforts of Morocco to guarantee the rights of persons deprived of their liberty. Nicaragua made a recommendation. 108. Norway commended Morocco for adopting a new Constitution, the Plan for Democracy and Human Rights and the implementation of the recommendations from the Equity and Reconciliation Commission.  It recognized the ratification of important human rights instruments: the OP-CEDAW and CAT.  Norway made recommendations. 109. Oman commended Morocco on its attention to strategic planning on human rights and its determination to work in compliance with international treaties and implement their provisions. 110. Pakistan commended Morocco for the structural reforms undertaken in the judicial system and its strategic planning in the field of human rights and the adoption of the Plan for Democracy and Human Rights. It noted Morocco’s efforts to combat poverty.  Pakistan made a recommendation. 111. Palestine congratulated Morocco on its role in consolidating regional mechanisms for the promotion and protection of human rights. It welcomed the new Constitution, which allowed greater political participation, an improved election process and better access to justice. Palestine made a recommendation. 112. Philippines welcomed Morocco’s recent initiatives on developing more institutions for the protection and promotion of human rights, especially the establishment in 2011 of the Inter-Ministerial Council on Human Rights, the Ombudsman and the broadening of the mandate of its National Human Rights Council.  The Philippines made a recommendation. 113. Portugal welcomed the withdrawal of the reservations to CEDAW and the new constitutional norms on equality under the law on inheritance, custody and marriage. It asked how those changes would be reflected in practice, namely the Family Code. Portugal made recommendations. 114. Qatar congratulated Morocco for having issued an open invitation in April 2011 to special procedures officers.  It welcomed positive initiatives in the area of employment. Qatar made recommendations. 115. Republic of Moldova welcomed the establishment in Morocco of regional mechanisms for the promotion and protection of human rights and inquired about preliminary assessment of these mechanisms.  It also noted Morocco’s experience in integrating gender dimension in the budgetary programming. It made recommendations. 116. Romania congratulated Morocco for the introduction in its strategic planning of the Plan for Democracy and Human Rights, as well as the first four priority fields mentioned in the National Report.  It also commended Morocco for its commitment towards human rights. 117. The Russian Federation noted Morocco’s measures for strengthening legislative framework for protection of human rights, reforms for judicial law-enforcement system, individual and collective rights, including freedom of assembly, adoption of a new Constitution and creation of the National Council on Human Rights.  It made a recommendation. 118. Saudi Arabia stressed the efforts deployed by Morocco through strengthening human rights mechanisms and noted the adoption of the new Moroccan Constitution by a referendum.  Saudi Arabia made a recommendation. 119. Senegal welcomed the guarantees on human rights in the new Constitution and the creation of structures and mechanisms to strengthen the institutional framework. It highlighted that Morocco would need technical support to enable it to overcome challenges. Senegal made recommendations. 120. Singapore highlighted Morocco’s efforts to further strengthen its domestic human rights framework, including the establishment of the Inter-Ministerial Unit on Human Rights in 2011.  It also commended Morocco’s efforts for improvement of the health care system, and in particular, reduction in maternal mortality rate. Singapore made recommendations. 121. Slovakia commended Morocco on the ratification of the CRPD and its Optional Protocol and on being among the first group of countries to sign the new Third Optional Protocol to the CRC on communications procedure.  Slovakia made recommendations. 122. Slovenia noted the positive steps taken by Morocco since its first review, such as acceding to the CRPD and its Optional Protocol as well as elaborating a national action plan and taking significant actions to improve gender equality.  Slovenia made recommendations. 123. South Africa acknowledged Morocco’s support in the fight against racism during the tenth-anniversary commemoration of the Durban Declaration and Program of Action.  It also welcomed the National Human Development Initiative and the Green Morocco plan.  It made recommendations. 124. Spain congratulated Morocco for its efforts in the field of human rights and for the creation of the National Council for Human Rights and the lifting of reservations in articles 9, paragraph 2, and 16 of CEDAW.  Spain made recommendations. 125. In its concluding remarks, Morocco indicated that, on gender issues, it has conducted an evaluation process of gender policy since 2005 through the presentation by the Government to Parliament as part of accountability. A gender report allows Morocco to assess public policy, identify gaps and to make further progress. Public authorities will be trained on gender issues both in terms of drafting evaluation and accountability. 126. On parity, the strategy for institutionalizing equality is among the best practices. The strategy on human rights education is implemented. Measures are being introduced to overcome difficulties in education, such as school dropout. Progress has been made concerning combating illiteracy, including among women. Integrated classes have been established, programmes for disabled children have been drawn up, and strategies have been crafted for better incorporation of these children in the educational system. 127. On cultural diversity and rights, there is an increased number of beneficiaries of Amazigh education, more teachers have been trained and textbooks which focus on cultural specificities reports on Amazigh culture are used. 128. On the issue of the marriage with the rapist, article 475 of the Criminal Code is linked to abduction of minor but not rape. A marriage can take place between the two but does not prevent from complaining. However, the issue is being discussed in Morocco and a topic for which a decision should be taken. Currently, all old prisons are being closed if not in conformity with the Minimum Standards conditions and are replaced by new ones. The budget for access to food has been increased by threefold in the past four years. Increased medical visits of detainees and health insurance system have been ensured.  II. Conclusions and/or recommendations**  ** The conclusions and recommendations have not been edited. 129. The recommendations formulated during the interactive dialogue, listed below, have been examined by Morocco and enjoy the support of Morocco:  129.1. Establish expressly in the Criminal Code the criminalization of enforced disappearances and a ban of its statute of limitations, as well as ratify the International Convention against Enforced Disappearances and recognize the competence of its Committee (Uruguay);  129.2. Acceded to the First Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women and the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture (Australia);  129.3. Consider ratifying the ILO Convention No. 87 concerning Freedom of Association and Protection of the Right to Organise (Chad);    129.4. Ratify the Optional Protocol of the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (Denmark);  129.5. Consider ratifying the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (Belgium, Estonia, France, Spain);  129.6. Consider ratifying the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court and fully align its legislation with all obligations under the Rome Statute, including incorporating the Rome Statute definition of crimes and general principles, as well as adopting provisions enabling cooperation with the Court (Austria, Costa Rica, Estonia, Latvia, Slovakia, Switzerland);  129.7. Ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Elimination of All forms of Discrimination against Women (Maldives);  129.8. Sign and ratify the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (Maldives);  129.9. Consider ratifying the ILO Convention 189 on Decent Work for Domestic Workers (Philippines);  129.10. Sign the Optional Protocol on the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (Portugal);  129.11. Ratify the Optional Protocol to CEDAW (Slovenia);  129.12. Submit to Parliament law on the protection of women from violence, which was announced during the UPR in 2008 (Switzerland);  129.13. Continue to strengthen the legal and institutional framework for the promotion and protection of all human rights (Zimbabwe);  129.14. Accelerate the deliberations on the draft law on domestic violence (Belgium);  129.15. Revise the Family Code to guarantee equality between fathers and mothers in guardianship of their children (Belgium);  129.16. Adopt a specific law for domestic violence, containing both criminal and civil provisions (Brazil);  129.17. Codify the principles of gender equality in all areas of its national legal framework (Denmark);  129.18. Study the possibility of harmonizing the domestic legislation with recently ratified international conventions and protocols (Ecuador);  129.19. Bring its legal system in line with its Constitution by implementing measures that guarantee gender equality and adopting legislation guaranteeing women effective remedies against violence (Estonia);  129.20. Continue the implementation of the provisions of the new Constitution so as to ensure full respect for human rights (France);  129.21. Accelerate the drafting process of a bill on domestic violence and take appropriate measures in order to effectively prevent gender discrimination (Germany);  129.22. Adopt measures to harmonize the legal order with the constitutional provisions on equality between men and women, including the revision of the Penal Code (Mexico);  129.23. Revise the Penal Code as well as other legislation such as the Family Code to ensure that they are in compliance with international standards (Norway);  129.24. Adopt a specific law on violence against women that contain both criminal and civil provisions (Norway);  129.25. Revise the Family Code and adopt and implement other appropriate measures to prevent marriages of minors (Slovakia);  129.26. Adopt legislative measures to combat violence against women, especially improve their protection in rural areas (Spain);  129.27. Continue its efforts to consolidate the progress achieved in promoting women's rights and protecting human rights (Congo);  129.28. Cooperate regionally in the field of National Human Rights Institutions (Hungary);  129.29. Continue strengthening the institutional mechanism for the promotion and protection of human rights (Nepal);  129.30. Prioritize and sufficiently resource the National Human Rights Council and the Office of the Ombudsman (Norway);  129.31. Continue cooperation and dialogue between the Government and non-governmental organizations (Jordan);  129.32. Continue the implementation of the National Initiative on Human Development Program and extend allocated human and financial resources (Kuwait);  129.33. Continue on promoting policies aiming at guarantying respect of cultural diversity in its territory (Lebanon);  129.34. Formulate programmes for the effective implementation of the National Action Plan for Democracy and Human Rights (Nepal);  129.35. Continue taking concrete measures to promote civil, political, economic, social, environmental and cultural rights (Nicaragua);  129.36. Continue efforts to disseminate the culture of human rights (Qatar);  129.37. Maintain as a priority the right of vulnerable persons (Senegal);  129.38. Consider extending a standing invitation to all special procedures of the Human Rights Council (Latvia, Uruguay);  129.39. Promote gender equality and parity and prevent violence against women (Thailand);  129.40. Continue to work in a concrete manner toward improving the status of women (Turkey);  129.41. Continue to give high priority to the promotion of women, children, persons with disabilities and migrants rights (Zimbabwe);  129.42. Continue fighting discrimination against persons with disabilities (Argentina);  129.43. Continue to address the remaining challenges, including in empowering women and ensuring gender equality in purposeful manner (Bangladesh);  129.44. Put in place the necessary arrangements to implement the new Constitution’s guarantees of equality between men and women, in accordance with its international obligations, including CEDAW’s Article 16 regarding marriage and family life (Canada);  129.45. Step up the progress made over the last decade in the field of equality and women’s rights (Djibouti);  129.46. Continue with the reforms to step up protection and promotion of social and cultural rights and also implement programmes on gender equality (Russian Federation);  129.47. Continue with reforms and practical measures in line with international standards in order to reach gender equality (Slovenia);  129.48. Investigate all allegations of police brutality and torture and prosecute all security force officials accused of harsh treatment (United States of America);  129.49. Consider the possibility of adopting measures aimed at abolishing the death penalty (Argentina);  129.50. Continue implementation of the moratorium on death penalty and make efforts to achieve the total abolishment of the death penalty (Austria, Holy See, Hungary, Spain); 129.51 Adopt a specific law on domestic violence and abolish the provisions allowing a rapist to escape punishment by marrying the victim; remove discriminatory legislative provisions that place the burden of proof solely on the victim (Austria);  129.52. Take additional measures to reduce prisons’ overcrowding and improve access to medical treatment and food (Austria);  129.53. Step up its efforts in the field of combating trafficking of human beings and consider the possibility of inviting the Special Rapporteur on trafficking in persons, especially women and children (Belarus);  129.54. Abolish the provisions which allow the rapist to escape from prosecution by marrying the victim (Belgium);  129.55. Consider putting in place measures or legislation to ensure prevention and punishment of acts of violence against women, and ensure that rapists do not evade criminal prosecution by marrying their victims (Botswana);  129.56. Continue the efforts aimed at strengthening the fight against torture, in compliance with international law (Chile);  129.57. Step up its efforts to ensure the protection of women against violence (Indonesia);  129.58. Carry out independent and impartial inquiries with respect to allegations of mistreatment in detention (Ireland);  129.59. Continue the debate in view of the abolishment of the death penalty (Italy);  129.60. Consider increasing the resources allocated to the prison system, as suggested by CAT (Italy);  129.61. Step up effort to prevent and combat sexual exploitation and trafficking in women and children,  including by ensuring that all allegations of trafficking and sexual abuses are investigated and the perpetrators are brought to justice and punished (Malaysia);  129.62. Enact legislative provisions prohibiting corporal punishment of girls and boys in the home and schools (Mexico);  129.63. Take all necessary actions to eliminate the practices enabling perpetrators of rape to escape a criminal conviction by marrying their young victims and safeguard the rights of rape victims (Netherlands);  129.64. Repeal articles 475 of the Penal Code, which permits perpetrators of rape to marry their victims to evade prosecution (Portugal);  129.65. Prohibit all forms of violence against children, including corporal punishment, in all settings (Portugal);  129.66. Accelerate efforts to prevent minors from being subjected to forced or hazardous domestic labour (Slovakia);  129.67. Take additional measures to train its security force, as recommended in 2008, in order to guarantee respect for human rights (Switzerland);  129.68. Step up its efforts to combat impunity and to ensure access to justice (Switzerland);  129.69. Intensify its efforts and measures to strengthen the rule of law (Viet Nam);  129.70. Continue reform of the criminal justice system, including ensuring that all detainees are either charged with recognizable criminal offences and tried in accordance with international standards for fair trial, or immediately released (Australia);  129.71. Conduct a national program or campaign to raise awareness about and encourage compliance with the new laws, along with similar campaigns directed towards judges and other operators of the law (Brazil);  129.72. Continue prioritizing the reform of justice, under the principle of separation of powers (Chile);  129.73. Continue programs of human rights training for law enforcement officials, in the field of torture and ill treatment, in line with the already established practice (Greece);  129.74. Adopt international human rights standard in national trials (Iraq);  129.75. Continue efforts to insure that victims of human rights violation are provided with efficient, flexible and instant compensation (Kuwait);  129.76. Pursue its efforts to guarantee to victims of human rights violations effective, flexible and prompt remedies (Republic of Moldova);  129.77. Intensify its efforts to combat cases of torture and other ill-treatment by state agents, by establishing a training plan in the field of human rights for the State’s security forces (Spain);  129.78. Continue action to increase representation of women in elected and decision-making positions (Sri Lanka);  129.79. Continue its action to promote freedom of expression and to accelerate the adoption of new law of press (Sudan);  129.80. Take immediate steps to implement the new Constitution’s provision that international human rights are to be fully respected, including press freedom, freedom of expression, assembly and association (Sweden);  129.81. Continue efforts to further enhance the separation of powers (Turkey);  129.82. Finalize, in collaboration with press associations and rights groups, a legal framework that ensures full freedom of expression (United States of America);  129.83. Promptly approve the license applications for all civil society organizations that meet legal requirements, including those organizations advocating for minority populations (United States of America);  129.84. Continue the effective and action-oriented cooperation between Government and national human rights institutions (Azerbaijan);  129.85. Revise the Press Code so that it would be in conformity with the international standards and take necessary measures to effectively apply the principles of freedom stipulated in the Constitution (Belgium);  129.86. Decriminalize press crimes and prevent arrests of individuals for expressing opinions including through social media (Canada);  129.87. Turn the draft new Press Code into a significant progress on the area of freedom of opinion and expression (Chile);  129.88. Continue enactment of legislations and strengthening of efficient public policies to insure protection and respect of women rights and their role in the society, including promoting women participation in public life and development process (Egypt);  129.89. Continue openness to a constructive dialogue with all members of the civil society (Egypt);  129.90. Revise the Press Code and other relevant legislation so that they would allow the enjoyment of freedom of information in line with international standards (Estonia);  129.91. Delete from the Press Code sentences involving deprivation of liberty and revise the criminal provisions in the area of freedom of expression so that no journalist or human rights defender can be arrested for a simple fact of having expressed his opinion (France);  129.92. Revise the Press Act and abolish provisions that lead to a restriction of freedom of opinion and expression and freedom of religion and belief and take measures in order to allow for free , impartial and objective media (Germany);  129.93. Pursue further policies aimed at improving women’s participation in all spheres of public life, including political and professional life (Greece);  129.94. Ensure the application, in line with international human rights provisions, of articles 3 of the new Constitution that guarantees freedom of worship for all (Holy See);  129.95. Take actions to ensure the right to freedom of expression as established by the Constitution (Mexico);  129.96. Revise the press law to comply with international standards concerning the media freedoms (Slovakia);  129.97. Take further measures to remove disparities in access to health care, in particular with respect to vulnerable groups and regions that are poorly served (Sri Lanka);  129.98. Ensure better access to health care and education by women and girls, especially in rural areas (Thailand);  129.99. Continue to increase and consolidate the Green Morocco and housing social programs which are essential for the eradication of poverty and social exclusion (Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of));  129.100. Allocate more resources to the programs that fight unemployment (Viet Nam);  129.101. Keep carrying out the relevant measures, including better social services for dealing with the problems of Moroccans living abroad (Azerbaijan);  129.102. Step up its investment in education, healthcare, employment in order to promote economic and social sustainable development (China);  129.103. Intensify efforts made to achieve further progress in enhancing economic, social and cultural rights, especially the rights of women, children, and disabled (Egypt);  129.104. Increase programs of obstetric, prenatal and neonatal care and attendance at deliveries by medical and paramedical professionals, especially in rural areas (Holy See);  129.105. Continue efforts with regard steps and measures taking to enhance economic and social rights that we value greatly (Jordan);  129.106. Allocate more resources in promoting and protecting human rights in crucial areas such as poverty eradication, justice administration, education, public health and gender equality for all sections of the population (Malaysia);  129.107. Introduce policies in the health system to address the needs of people in situation of vulnerability (Mexico);  129.108. Continue the campaign put in case for the widespread access to potable water and electricity in the rural area (Monaco);  129.109. Continue improving the business environment to stimulate job opportunities (Pakistan);  129.110. Continue improving and advancing the measures related to work environment and creation of job opportunities (Palestine);  129.111. Intensify efforts to consolidate economic and social rights, especially in the area of health, education, housing and unemployment (Qatar);  129.112. Exert additional efforts toward improving economic rights (Saudi Arabia);  129.113. Continue to take measures to promote economic, social and cultural rights (Senegal);  129.114.  Continue, with the assistance from the relevant international organizations such as the WHO, to enhance access to health care by women and further reduce the maternal mortality rate, especially in the rural areas (Singapore);  129.115.  Continue the prioritization of initiatives to combat poverty and ensure programmes aimed at poverty reduction are adequately funded (South Africa);  129.116.  Continue putting forward effective measures for reducing illiteracy and boosting the quality and performance of education in the country (Azerbaijan);  129.117. Take additional measures to improve universal access to primary education (Belarus);  129.118. Continue its considerable efforts to integrate human rights education in the school programmes and textbooks (Djibouti);  129.119. Increasing mainstreaming of human rights value in education curricula (Iraq);  129.120. Continue its efforts to enhance general education, awareness campaigns and training programmes on human rights (Singapore);  129.121. Develop strategies to better manage the migratory flows of political and economic refugees who unfortunately overwhelm Morocco’s capacity and resources (Swaziland);  129.122. Continue progress in the implementation of the policies that safeguard the rights and dignity of migrants (Indonesia);  129.123. Continue cooperating with the United Nations human rights mechanisms (Costa Rica);  129.124. Take the necessary measures to ensure full respect for human rights in the framework of counter-terrorism struggle, and in particular, the rights to defense and non-use of torture (France);  129.125. Actively pursue the program scheduled by the National Human Rights Institution and share the best practices acquired with the international community (Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of));  129.126. Streamline its experience of establishing Inter-ministerial public administration and delegation dealing with human rights in order to make other countries benefit from this experience (Yemen);  129.127. Organize regional conferences in Morocco to exchange views and best practices on promoting forward looking initiatives and fostering cooperation between regional groups (Hungary);  129.128. Continue to expand the experience in gender sensitive budgeting, which could be considered as a good practice for all of the Middle East and North Africa region and elsewhere (Republic of Moldova). 130. The following recommendations enjoy the support of Morocco which considers that they are already implemented or in the process of implementation:  130.1. Intensify its efforts to ratify the International Convention for the Protection of all Persons from Enforced Disappearances (Argentina);  130.2. Continue its efforts to strengthening the rights of children, especially those concerning juvenile justice and courts competent for minors (Sudan);  130.3. Take measures to protect human rights defenders, particularly in the Western Sahara, against harassment, repression, arrest or detention, including by granting an official accreditation to the associations working in this field (Canada);  130.4. Address unemployment among young people (Thailand);  130.5. Continue to cooperate closely with civil society to combat child mortality so as to attain the MDG 4 (Uzbekistan);  130.6. Continue to work toward improving access to health (Bahrain);  130.7. Continue its efforts to implement the strategy of the Ministry of Health, particularly in the area of maternal and child health so as to reduce even further the child mortality rate, which is in connection with the Millennium Development Goal 4 (Monaco);  130.8. Continue the provision of social housing to the rural communities with the aim of improving their living conditions (South Africa);   130.9. Continue to ensure basic education for all children in all the territory of Morocco and continue providing quality education programs with a special attention to the prevention of school dropout (United Arab Emirates);  130.10. Take further measures to reduce school dropout rates (Greece);  130.11. Give particular attention to all measures to improve the human rights situation in Western Sahara, in particular develop and implement independent and credible measures to ensure full respect for human rights and guaranteeing such basic rights as freedom of association and expression (Ireland);  130.12. Take measures to ensure the adequate protection of human rights in the Western Sahara in light of the reported cases of enforced disappearances, torture and ill-treatment, restrictions on freedom of expression, association and assembly by Moroccan security forces (Spain). 131. The recommendations below did not enjoy the support of Morocco:  131.1. Consider withdrawing the remaining declarations and reservations to CEDAW (Slovenia);  131.2. Lift its declarations concerning articles 2 and 15 of the CEDAW and change the legislative provisions that still discriminate against women (Switzerland);  131.3. Introduce a de jure moratorium on the executions as rapidly as possible (Belgium);  131.4. Ensure that the procedures governing registration of civil society organizations, including organizations advocating for the Saharawi people’s right to self-determination, are in conformity with international standards (Norway).  131.5. Commute all of the death penalties to prison sentences and abolish, once and for all, death penalty (France);  131.6. Revise the Family Code to prohibit polygamy and marriage of minors (Belgium);  131.7. Revise the Family Code to guarantee equality between men and women in inheritance matters (Belgium). 132. The following recommendation is rejected by Morocco which considers that it does not fall within the scope of the mandate of the Human Rights Council:  132.1. Accept the establishment of a permanent human rights component in the United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara (MINURSO), being the only peacekeeping mission not having this component (Uruguay). 133. All conclusions and/or recommendations contained in the present report reflect the position of the submitting State(s) and/or the State under review. They should not be construed as endorsed by the Working Group as a whole.  III. Voluntary pledges and commitments 134. Morocco informed the Working Group of its plan to submit a progressive report in two years in which it will mention the level of progress in the implementation of recommendations it accepted. Annex [English/French only]   Composition of the delegation The delegation of Morocco was headed by H.E. Mr. Mustapha RAMID, Ministre de la Justice et des Libertés and composed of the following members: • M. Mahjoub EL HAIBA, Délégué Interministériel aux Droits de l’Homme; • M. Nasser BOURITA, Secrétaire Général du Ministère des Affaires Etrangères; • M. Omar HILALE, Ambassadeur, Représentant Permanent du Royaume du Maroc auprès de l’Office des Nations Unies et des autres Organisations Internationales à Genève; • M. Mohamed OUZGANE, Gouverneur, Directeur des Libertés Publiques et de la Réglementation, Ministère de l’Intérieur; • M. Mohamed Abd ENNABAOUI, Directeur des Affaires Pénales et des Grâces, Ministère de la Justice et des Libertés; • M. Mohammed CHAFIKI, Directeur des Etudes et des prévisions Financières, Ministère des Finances; • Mme Oufa MOKHLISSE, Ministère de l’Habitat, de l’Urbanisme et de la politique de la ville; • M. Abderrazak ROUWANE, Secrétaire Général, Délégation Interministérielle aux Droits de l’Homme; • M. Mohamed BENALILOU, Chef de Cabinet, Ministère de la Justice et des Libertés; • M. Abdelmounaim EL FAROUK, Chef de Division des Droits de l’Homme et des Questions Humanitaires, Ministère des Affaires Etrangères et de la Coopération; • Mme Frouh Laila BEL FAKIR, Chef de Division de l’Enfance, Ministère de la Solidarité, de la Femme et du Développement Social; • Mme Farida KHAMLICHI, Chargée de Mission auprès du Chef du Gouvernement; • M. Driss NAJIM, Conseiller au Cabinet de M. le Ministre de la Justice et des Libertés; • M. Essaid SOUKRATI, Ministère de l’Emploi et de la Formation Professionnelle; • Mme Khadija TABBANE, Ministère de la Santé; • M. Ahmed CHAKIB, Délégation Interministérielle aux Droits de l’Homme; • M. El Mostapha BAREZ, Délégation Générale de l’Administration Pénitentiaire et de la Réinsertion; • Mme Saloua EL KOUBAITI, Membre de la Commission Centrale des Droits de l’Homme et de la citoyenneté, Ministère de l’Education Nationale; • M. Moulay AHMED MGHIZLAT, Membre du Conseil, Conseil Royal Consultatif pour les Affaires Sahariennes-CORCAS; • Mme Aïcha ALAHIANE, Membre du Conseil d’Administration, Institut Royal de la Culture Amazigh; • M. Abderrazzak LAASSEL, Ministre Plénipotentiaire à la Mission Permanente du Maroc à Genève; • M. Hassane BOUKILI, Ministre Plénipotentiaire auprès de la Mission du Maroc à Genève; • M. Mohamed ACHGALOU ; Conseiller auprès de la Mission du Maroc à Genève; • M. Omar RABI, Conseiller auprès de la Mission du Maroc à Genève; • Mlle Najoua EL BERRAK, Conseiller auprès de la Mission du Maroc à Genève; • Mlle Majda MOUTCHOU, Conseiller auprès de la Mission du Maroc à Genève; • Mme El Hadrami Nezha, Chef de la Division des Etudes et des affaires Juridiques, Ministère de la Communication; • Mme Saadia ATAOUI, Chef de la Division de la Communication, Ministère de la Communication; • M. Omar ABASSI, Ministère chargé des relations avec le Parlement et la Société Civile; • M. Mohamed BELGHOUATE, Directeur des études, Ministère de la Communication; • Mme Hasna TRIBAK, Délégation Interministérielle aux Droits de l’Homme.     