Distr.: General 11 July 2011 Original: English General Assembly Human Rights Council Eighteenth session Agenda item 6 Universal Periodic Review Report of the Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review Singapore* * The annex to the present report is circulated as received. Contents Paragraphs Page Introduction ............................................................................................................... 1–4 3 
I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process................................................. 5–93 3 
A. Presentation by the State under review ............................................................ 5–14 3 
B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review ........................ 15–93 4 
II. Conclusions and/or recommendations...................................................................... 94–100 14  Annex Composition of the delegation ............................................................................................................ 23 Introduction 1. The Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review, established in accordance with Human Rights Council resolution 5/1 of 18 June 2007, held its eleventh session from 2 to 13 May 2011.  The review of Singapore was held at the 9th meeting on 6 May 2011. The delegation of Singapore was headed by Mr. Ong Keng Yong , Ambassador-at-Large in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs At its 13th meeting held on 10 May 2011, the Working Group adopted the report on Singapore. 2. On 21 June 2010, the Human Rights Council selected the following group of rapporteurs (troika) to facilitate the review of Singapore: Bahrain, Djibouti, Spain. 3. In accordance with paragraph 15 of the annex to resolution 5/1, the following documents were issued for the review of Singapore: (a) A national report submitted/written presentation made in accordance with paragraph 15 (a) (A/HRC/WG.6/11/SGP/1); (b) A compilation prepared by OHCHR in accordance with paragraph 15 (b) (A/HRC/WG.6/11/SGP/2); (c) A summary prepared by OHCHR in accordance with paragraph 15 (c) (A/HRC/WG.6/11/SGP/3 and Corr.1). 4. A list of questions prepared in advance by Belgium, Canada, Czech Republic, Denmark, Ireland, Latvia, Namibia, Netherlands, Norway, Slovenia, Sweden, Switzerland and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland was transmitted to Singapore through the troika. These questions are available on the extranet of UPR. I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process A. Presentation by the State under review 5. In its opening statement, Singapore affirmed that it was committed to the promotion and protection of human rights and had worked hard to improve the lives of its people. Singaporeans were now better educated, better connected and informed, better housed, and led longer and healthier lives, with greater dignity and far wider life choices than at independence in 1965. 6. While there was still room for improvement, substantial progress had been made in the relatively short history of Singapore. Progress had been based on some fundamental and interrelated principles. 7. The first principle was balance. Rights implied obligations. Trade-offs between different kinds of rights were inevitable. While everyone must adhere to a universal standard of human rights, the interpretation and implementation of rights could not be divorced from their societal context and would evolve as society evolved. 8. The second principle was prioritization. As a small, multiracial and densely populated city State, social harmony formed the vital and irreplaceable foundation of the country’s survival and development. If social cohesion was ruptured, it could not be easily restored. Hence Singapore prioritized social harmony above other values. 9. The third principle was pragmatism. Singapore focused on the practical implementation of rights and how to balance them with economic imperatives and social stability. Acknowledging that there were no perfect solutions, Singapore noted by way of example that, after independence, English had been chosen as the working language of Singapore, even though it was not native to its Malay, Chinese and Indian population. Some limits on certain freedoms had to be accepted in order to live in harmony. For example, Singapore moderated the loudness of calls to prayer from mosques as well as the size of joss sticks that Buddhists and Taoists burned in public. To maintain equilibrium, Singapore had to make difficult choices between one right and another right and make adjustments at the margins. 10. The fourth principle was meritocracy. As a small country with no natural resources except its people, Singapore had to bring out the best in every person, regardless of gender, race or any other criteria. For those who faced socio-economic disadvantages at the outset, Government assistance schemes helped to put them on an even footing. 11. The final principle was effective governance, without which no other right could be realized. Good governance formed the foundation of the country’s progress and stability and was built upon democratic accountability and the rule of law, a long-term orientation and social justice. 12. The Government achieved social justice through equal treatment of all groups and heavily subsidized social infrastructure to facilitate social mobility, rather than social welfare. Singapore believed that the best way to empower people was to provide them with the capacity to look after themselves. For the vulnerable, who, despite their best efforts, were unable to improve on their situations, the Government provided targeted assistance. 13. At the international level, effective governance meant that Singapore took its international obligations seriously. Thus, Singapore would only sign on to a treaty when it was absolutely sure that it could implement it. Singapore should be able to accede to the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities by 2012. 14. Singapore was constantly evolving and adapting to improve its unique society. The balance of rights and obligations would need to be guided by the interests of its people and the constraints of Singaporean geography, size and society. B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review 15. During the interactive dialogue, 54 delegations made statements. A number of delegations thanked Singapore for its constructive participation, openness and willingness to cooperate in the universal periodic review process and acknowledged its efforts in the promotion and protection of human rights. Active dialogue with civil society during the preparation of the national report was positively noted. Additional statements which could not be delivered during the interactive dialogue owing to time constraints were posted on the Extranet of the universal periodic review where available.1 Recommendations made during the dialogue are to be found in chapter II of the present report. 16. Brunei Darussalam thanked Singapore for carrying out broad consultations involving relevant NGOs. It congratulated Singapore on its achievements and its commitment to promoting and protecting the rights of its people. Brunei Darussalam looked forward to working closely with Singapore in promoting and protecting human rights such 1 	Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belgium, Brazil, Burkina Faso, Cape Verde, Chile, China, Costa Rica, Ecuador, Germany, Hungary, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Italy, Jamaica, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Maldives, Mexico, Namibia, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Palestine, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Rwanda, Senegal, Slovakia, Spain, Sweden, Turkey, Ukraine, United States of America. as through the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) Intergovernmental Commission on Human Rights as well as the ASEAN Commission on the Promotion and Protection of the Rights of Women and Children. It made recommendations. 17. The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea acknowledged the multifaceted nature of Singaporean society and the positive steps taken to ensure racial and religious harmony, while giving equal importance to ensuring stability, equality and social justice as prerequisites for development. It commended the country’s achievements in economic, social and cultural rights, demonstrated by economic growth and improvement of living standards. The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea believed that those achievements were a result of importance attached by the Government to human rights. It made recommendations. 18. Myanmar appreciated the broad consultation process undertaken by the Government in preparation of the review. It also noted that the Government had taken a number of effective measures to maintain racial and religious harmony, particularly implementing constitutional clauses for the protection of racial and religious minorities. It acknowledged the challenges overcome by Singapore and the improvement of the well-being and the enjoyment of human rights of its people including rights of migrant workers by enhancing social justice and delivering effective public service. Myanmar made a recommendation. 19. Ethiopia noted Singaporean efforts to comply with its international human rights obligations. It recognized the rich tradition and successes in intercultural and interreligious coexistence and harmony.  It commended the country’s economic development and wished to learn from that experience. It requested information on how Singapore succeeded in ensuring fair access to education for all linguistic communities and groups while ensuring a system that nurtured and valued meritocracy. Ethiopia made recommendations. 20. Lesotho welcomed the efforts to protect the rights of special groups of people. It applauded the enactment of the Compulsory Education Act of 2003 as evidence of the progress in the field of education. It urged the international community to continue to lend support to the efforts made by Singapore to enhance the discharge of its human rights obligations. Lesotho made recommendations.  21. The Lao Peoples’ Democratic Republic congratulated Singapore for attaining political stability, equality and social justice. It noted its massive progress in economic development and the fight against poverty. It highlighted that Singapore was party to basic human rights instruments and commended it for taking these obligations seriously. It made recommendations. 22. Cambodia acknowledged the fact that the Singaporean multi-ethnic and multicultural society had lived peacefully throughout many decades. It noted that Singapore was recognized as one of the least corrupt countries in the world. It praised efforts to improve the high living standard of its citizens along with human rights so as to further advance the lives and well-being of its people, especially in the economic, social and cultural areas. It recalled that Singapore was actively involved in the ASEAN Intergovernmental Commission on Human Rights to address issues such as the ASEAN instrument on the protection and promotion of the rights of migrant workers.  23. The Philippines commended Singaporean achievements in many socio-economic fields, such as the provision of health and social services, education, and affordable housing. It noted the country’s commitment to good governance. It commended new legislation passed to improve the conditions of foreign household service workers. The Philippines made recommendations.  24. Saudi Arabia acknowledged achievements in the health sector, which was not only ranked the best in Asia, but also sixth internationally, with high life expectancy and low infant mortality rate. Saudi Arabia commended Singapore for its impressive welfare achievements as reflected in the United Nations Development Programme’s Human Development Report and the attainment of a 96 per cent literacy rate. It made recommendations. 25. Botswana recognized the Singaporean commitment to human rights and fundamental freedoms, adherence to democracy, good governance and rule of law, which had contributed to its sustained economic growth. It congratulated Singapore on its achievements in gender empowerment and successes in the field of education, committed to values of meritocracy. It commended Singapore for sustaining peaceful coexistence of its diverse communities. It made recommendations. 26. Indonesia praised the steady development and rapid growth of Singapore since its independence. Indonesia noted that the literacy rate stood at 96 per cent and that Singapore scored high in the Human Development Index. Indonesia mentioned that Singaporean development had lifted the standard of living of its people and ensured their enjoyment of fundamental human rights. Indonesia made recommendations. 27. Thailand appreciated the country’s promotion of good governance and human rights at all levels and commended its development of legal and institutional framework, particularly the amended Criminal Procedure Code. It welcomed the promotion of barrier-free accessibility for people with disabilities and noted Singaporean efforts in combating human trafficking. It made recommendations. 28. Malaysia acknowledged the socio-economic development of Singapore, and the promotion and protection of the rights in all fields especially in health, education, housing, and work, as well as the rights of women, children, elderly and persons with disabilities. Malaysia appreciated the importance Singapore attached to the maintenance of political stability, good governance and the economic well-being of its population. Malaysia made recommendations. 29. Viet Nam noted the five fundamental principles governing Singaporean policy on human rights. It welcomed Singaporean achievements, especially in the fields of education, health care and gender equality. It noted the country’s success in economic development and in improving the lives of its people and appreciated its approach to maintain racial and religious harmony. It made recommendations. 30. The Russian Federation positively assessed the continuous efforts of Singapore in the protection of human rights. It highlighted the achievements in the implementation of economic, social and cultural rights – particularly in education and health – in the fight against corruption, and the protection of vulnerable groups, including, women, children and persons with disabilities. It made a recommendation. 31. Qatar noted that Singapore had overcome all challenges in establishing a national identity and living in harmony, although it was a young and small country, with a multiracial, multicultural, multireligious and multilingual population. That had contributed to it succeeding in all economic, social and cultural aspects to become a model for developing countries. Qatar commended the educational system, which had been commended in the Human Development Report of 2009. Qatar made recommendations. 32. Pakistan welcomed the country’s commitment to human rights and its resolve to evolve laws and policies to meet changing political, economic and social aspirations of Singaporeans. It was encouraged that Singapore was considering accession to several international human rights treaties. It noted its economic growth and social stability. It inquired about the Singaporean model of education and noted the role of the National Steering Committee on Racial and Religious Harmony. It made a recommendation. 33. The Sudan acknowledged the achievements at the level of stability and security, which were prerequisites of economic growth and which had been achieved although it was a young city-State with a multiracial, multireligious and multilingual population. At the same time, Singapore lived up to the fundamental human rights enshrined in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the Constitution. The Sudan enquired about further steps to improve the protection of special groups, including the disabled and elderly. It made recommendations. 34. Nepal praised the country’s maintenance of a harmonious multicultural society amidst diversity. It commended the constitutional and legislative framework which enhanced the protection of human rights. Nepal congratulated Singapore for its high rank in the Human Development Index and for its high life expectancy, low infant mortality, schemes for the aged, good governance and progress made in gender empowerment. Nepal made recommendations. 35. Djibouti commended Singapore for being an example of success in economic and social development, as demonstrated for its high literacy rate. Djibouti made recommendations. 36. Zimbabwe applauded Singapore for its political, socio-economic, technological and cultural prowess, which had ensured unity and the full enjoyment of human rights for its citizens, particularly women, children, migrant workers and the disabled. It noted that the country’s approach to treaty obligations was worth learning from. It made recommendations. 37. India noted that Singapore was a young city State with a multi-ethnic and multireligious society which had achieved a transformation into a sophisticated economy over a short period of time. India was encouraged to note the recent easing of regulations on political expression, including on political films and Internet election advertising. India urged the Government to continue to build upon those initiatives, including in the realm of regulations on media. India requested more information on how Singapore was preparing for an ageing population. India made recommendations. 38. Morocco noted that Singapore was a model for development and economic success. It noted that, since independence, Governments of Singapore had known how to adapt their policies with its multireligious and multicultural society. It noted Singaporean achievements in human development index, literacy rates and low levels of corruption. It made a recommendation. 39. Belarus noted the success achieved by Singapore, especially in protecting social, economic and cultural rights. Belarus noted its significant success in its fight against corruption, illiteracy, unemployment, and in ensuring adequate housing to its population. It also praised the Singaporean health system and referred to progress made in several fields, such as ageing, the rights of children, and in inter-ethnic and inter-confessional harmony. Belarus made recommendations. 40. Oman noted that Singapore was a small State with a high density of population. Although its citizens were coming from different ethnic and religious backgrounds, Singapore was able to achieve harmony, coexistence and cohesion as a result of its policies and the management of relations between religions and ethnicity. Singapore had made progress in the areas of economy and education. It developed its economic, social and cultural policies to achieve a high standard of living and human development. Oman made recommendations. 41. South Africa noted that the Singaporean report emphasized the universality and indivisibility of human rights and commended its progress in education, health, housing, employment and social security. It encouraged Singapore to maintain that focus. It asked about the process and timeframe for accession to several key international human rights treaties. It made recommendations. 42. The United Arab Emirates noted achievements particularly in the area of economic, social and cultural rights. It highly appreciated the emphasis on the health and education sectors as bases to build on for progress in human development. Its education system had become a model to follow as testified by international organizations and in a special report concerning health in the world issued by the World Health Organization. It made recommendations. 43. Bhutan noted with appreciation the country’s development, which had raised the standard of living of its people and ensured the enjoyment of fundamental rights, particularly the rights of the more vulnerable groups, such as women, children, migrant workers, the disabled and the aged. Bhutan highlighted the Singaporean vision to be an inclusive society for persons with disabilities. Bhutan made recommendations. 44. Sri Lanka noted the country’s broad consultations with local stakeholders and non.governmental sources in approaching the review. It commended the country’s massive strides since 1965 to improve literacy, transform its economy and increase gross domestic product per capita. It praised Singaporean health and education, as well the establishment of the Ministerial Steering Committee on Foreign Worker Management. It made recommendations. 45. Singapore stated that the Government was committed to looking after all Singaporeans and recognized the particular needs of various groups of society, including children, women, persons with disabilities and the elderly, aiming to empower all to uplift themselves and be self-reliant. Singapore was committed to its obligations under the Convention on the Rights of the Child and the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women as evidenced by the concrete progress made in protecting and advancing the status and outcomes of these groups. 46. Singapore addressed questions raised regarding children. On compulsory education, Singapore explained that all children, including those with disabilities, had access to quality education. Those with severe disabilities, who could not attend mainstream schools, attended special education schools, overseen by the Ministry of Education. On the age of criminal responsibility, Singapore gave assurances that its laws took into account maturity of understanding for child offenders aged between 7 and 12. The juvenile justice system was restorative and enabled early intervention. On corporal punishment, Singapore emphasized positive forms of discipline. Hence, corporal punishment was not common and was only conducted as a last resort with strict regulations, guidelines and procedures. 47. Singapore assured that it regularly reviewed its reservations and declarations on the the Convention on the Rights of the Child and the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, and was, for instance, reviewing the scope of its reservations to the latter. Singapore believed in equal opportunities for men and women on the basis of meritocracy. The equality of all persons before the law was enshrined in article 12 of the Constitution. The rights of women were also protected by other legislation such as the Employment Act, the Penal Code and the Women’s Charter. 48. On women-related issues, its implementation of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, including the relationship between the sharia law and civil law, was kept under constant review. The practice of sharia law in Singapore was progressive and responsive to the changing societal context. The Government had implemented the Committee’s concluding observations by undertaking studies on comparative jurisprudence and legislation of other countries, particularly on gender and family law in Islam. Singapore would provide an update during its fourth periodic report at the Committee’s forty-ninth session in July 2011. 49. Singapore stressed that it had comprehensive laws protecting women. On sexual harassment, Singapore had laws that could be used to prosecute such acts in appropriate cases. On marital rape, changes had recently been made to the Penal Code to protect women whose marriages were on the verge of breakdown or had broken down. 50. Singapore reiterated its commitment to protecting religious freedom for all. No one was disadvantaged on the basis of race, language or religion. Racial and religious harmony was upheld through a combination of institutional, community-based and legal measures. 51. Singapore explained its emphasis on social security and assistance through health care, public housing, compulsory savings through the Central Provident Fund, and Workfare. It had established a Community Care Endowment Fund in 2005 to provide sustainable funding for programmes for low-income Singaporeans. That served as the final social safety net for those facing financial hardship. 52. Recognizing the challenges of an ageing population, Singapore had established a Ministerial Committee on Ageing. It was committed to ensuring employability and financial security, holistic and affordable health care and elder care, ageing-in-place, and active ageing. On disability issues, its comprehensive and multi-stakeholder 2007–2011 Enabling Masterplan emphasized early intervention, education, employment opportunities, community-based services and programmes for care-givers. 53. On migrant workers, Singapore assured that it took the well-being of migrant workers very seriously through regular reviews of legislation, effective enforcement and regular education and outreach. For example, recruitment regulations were recently tightened to reduce exploitation by employment agencies. Employers were also required to provide proper housing, adequate rest and medical treatment and pay promised salaries. These efforts were coordinated by a ministerial steering committee. Specific measures to address the vulnerability of migrant domestic workers included higher maximum penalties under the Penal Code, and extensive coverage of rights under the Employment of Foreign Manpower Act, taking into account the particular working conditions of migrant workers. 54. On restricting foreign domestic workers from marrying Singaporeans and requiring regular medical examinations, given its space constraints, Singapore could not afford to absorb large numbers of migrants on a permanent basis. Migrant workers were provided with the full legal protection they needed to earn a living. However, most migrant workers were aware that they went to Singapore to work, and not to put down roots or settle down for good. 55. Singapore expressed its commitment to combating trafficking in persons, highlighting its four ‘P’ approach – effective prevention, active prosecution, victim protection and proactive problem-solving with foreign counterparts and NGOs. In particular, Singapore clarified that trafficking victims were not prosecuted for immigration or other offences. Procedures were in place to determine whether the individual was a trafficking victim. If so, they would be assisted by a dedicated unit specially trained to identify and help victims of sex trafficking. Singapore had set up an inter-agency taskforce to develop a national plan of action and was exploring accession to the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children, supplementing the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography. 56. Kazakhstan noted achievements made by Singapore in ensuring stability, equality and social justice and referred to its priority of maintaining racial and religious harmony. It commended Singapore for encouraging active citizenry and launching a government agency in that regard. It also commended Singapore for abiding by its treaty commitments. Kazakhstan made a recommendation. 57. Slovenia welcomed the commitment of the Government to improving protection of vulnerable groups, including the disabled and elderly. Slovenia commended Singapore for ensuring peaceful coexistence for its people. It noted that freedoms of assembly and expression had been curtailed to a considerable extent in order to achieve that, and that there were considerable restrictions on public discourse on issues of ethnicity, language, race, religion and politically sensitive issues. Slovenia made recommendations. 58. Finland commended Singaporean efforts to promote good governance, rule of law and to prevent and combat corruption. It welcomed the invitation extended to the Special Rapporteur on contemporary forms of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance and encouraged further such invitations. It asked if Singapore was going to take action to ratify other core international human rights treaties and if it was considering steps to comply with international human rights norms regarding the death penalty. It made recommendations. 59. Timor-Leste commended Singapore for its achievements in delivering high economic and social development for its citizens, developing its human capital and establishing and maintaining a transparent Government. It noted that most core human rights treaties had not been ratified by Singapore and that the latter had not foreseen the establishment of a national human rights institution. Timor-Leste made recommendations. 60. Algeria noted with admiration the country’s level of development, which  had made a positive impact in many areas related to human rights. It welcomed recent constitutional changes opening the country to social media. It valued the Government’s endeavour to promote harmony. It noted progress for women and success in economic and social development. It made recommendations. 61. Cuba welcomed the country’s engagement with the promotion of human rights. It highlighted the country’s cultural, religious and ethnic diversity which had contributed to its high economic and social development. Cuba pointed out that Singapore had strived to made progress both in economic, social and cultural rights as well as in civil and political rights, especially regarding specific groups, in areas such as education, health and social security. Cuba made recommendations. 62. Canada congratulated Singapore on its ratification of the Convention on the Civil Aspects of International Child Abduction and welcomed its intention to sign the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. It recognized Singaporean work to support human rights in the framework of ASEAN. It noted that issues remained with respect to freedom of expression and assembly; migrant workers and women; corporal punishment; the death penalty; judicial processes, and the absence of a national human rights institution and an independent electoral body. Canada made recommendations. 63. The Czech Republic appreciated the participation of Singapore in the review process and welcomed the detailed report. It made recommendations. 64. The Republic of Moldova commended Singapore for its commitment to promoting and protecting human rights. It acknowledged as positive the development of various sectoral strategies concerning children. It welcomed efforts to work towards the practical realization of the principle of equality between women and men. The Republic of Moldova made recommendations.  65. Mozambique noted that conviviality among different communities in Singapore had brought about unparalleled political, social and economic progress. It highlighted the country’s commitment to secularism and the principle of equality and welcomed the amendment made to the Penal Code in order to cover nationals who sexually exploit minors. It encouraged Singapore to ratify the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination and the Optional Protocol on the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography, among others. 66. Uzbekistan pointed out consistent efforts by Singapore to promote human rights. It welcomed the positive results in the protection of the rights of women, children, the elderly and the disabled, and the protection of the right to education, health and labour. It highlighted the intention of Singapore to step up its efforts in the area of human rights. 67. Egypt valued the emphasis placed by Singapore on ensuring the enforcement of laws pertaining to the promotion and protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms, while balancing all rights. Egypt took note of efforts aimed at the advancement of gender equality and empowerment of women, with emphasis on fighting domestic violence. It noted that it would appreciate further elaboration on the measures undertaken to protect child victims of exploitation. Egypt made recommendations. 68. Honduras noted Singaporean commitment to the protection of human rights and highlighted its education system, health system and the protection provided to victims of trafficking. It shared the concern of the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women that women and girls who are victims of trafficking should not be punished for migratory infractions. It also noted Singaporean efforts to improve the situation of foreign domestic workers. It asked about ratification of the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination. 69. Ghana applauded Singapore for the improvement of the standard of living of its population. It noted with interest its economic and social progress and commended its commitment to the promotion of social and cultural rights. It praised the comprehensive education and health systems of Singapore. It noted positively the high employment rate in Singapore, as well as the initiatives to promote the advancement of women’s rights. Ghana made a recommendation. 70. Swaziland noted that the Singapore Constitution enshrined a range of fundamental liberties and imposed on the Government the responsibility to protect indigenous peoples. It noted Singapore insisted on rule of law to ensure stability, equality and social justice. It commended Singapore for its ratification of international human rights instruments, for its sophisticated economy, educational and health systems. It made recommendations. 71. Japan commended numerous achievements made towards guaranteeing the social rights of the people as attested to by the high rate of education and low unemployment. However, Japan was concerned about the situation of foreign workers, particularly foreign domestic workers. It emphasized the importance of ensuring a free flow of information to promote the diversity of ideas fundamental to democracy, noting that the media were heavily regulated. Japan inquired about efforts made to ensure freedom of the press. Japan made a recommendation. 72. France deplored that the death penalty still existed in Singapore, as well as the lack of transparency of executions and convictions. It noted positively that Singapore planned to accede to several human rights instruments. It was concerned about the absence of a provision guaranteeing gender equality in the Constitution. It welcomed that the provision of the Penal Code criminalizing homosexuality was no longer applied. France regretted that caning was still considered a punishment. France made recommendations. 73. Switzerland welcomed Singaporean efforts to maintain peaceful coexistence among its diverse communities. It expressed concern over the use of corporal punishment in the education system. It also expressed concern that Singaporeans’ right to express their opinions peacefully and to participate in public life was limited. It made recommendations. 74. Poland acknowledged the cooperation of Singapore with special procedures. It noted with concern that Singapore was still not a party to a number of core human rights treaties. It welcomed efforts undertaken to protect the rights of children and expressed concerns about the lack of full implementation of the Convention on the Rights of the Child. Poland made recommendations. 75. The United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland welcomed the country’s agreement to the establishment of an ASEAN human rights mechanism. It also welcomed the decision in 2008 to allow at least one space for free assembly and expression in Singapore, at Speaker’s Corner. The Untied Kingdom considered that Singapore could be a leading nation in upholding democracy and human rights as well as leading in economic activities. It hoped for progress in the area of freedom of expression and regarding abolition of the death penalty. United Kingdom made recommendations. 76. Trinidad and Tobago referred to the importance attached by Singapore to the maintenance of social and political stability, as well as its commitment to protect human rights, as exemplified by its accession to various human rights instruments. Trinidad and Tobago commended welfare achievements, especially in education, health, gender equality and the rights of persons with disabilities. Trinidad and Tobago made recommendations. 77. Iraq appreciated efforts in continuing to improve the protection to all special groups in the country and welcomed successes in improving living standard, including through efforts in child protection and laws and programmes to support equality between men and women. This demonstrated the will of the Government to promote and protect human rights, always with respect for religious and ethnic diversity. Iraq encouraged Singapore to request technical assistance from the international community to further promote human rights on the ground. Iraq made a recommendation. 78. Jordan commended Singapore for its sincere and ongoing efforts to further promote and protect human rights and fundamental freedoms. Jordan noted efforts to strengthen the institutional framework, including through the establishment of bodies such as the national Family Council, the Central Youth Guidance Office and the Office of Public Guardian. Jordan was confident that Singapore was considering the feasibility of accession to several international instruments. Jordan made recommendations.  79. Afghanistan acknowledged positive developments for the protection of human rights in Singapore and made recommendations. 80. Lebanon commended the achievements in the area of human development and especially in the areas of education and health-care system. While acknowledging that some challenges still lay ahead, Lebanon asked about steps taken or envisaged to ensure basic rights for domestic workers, and about steps to ensure women could enjoy equal rights to men in the field of employment. 81. Singapore, in response to questions on preventive detention, affirmed that it was used only as a last resort in very exceptional circumstances, and with appropriate procedural safeguards. For example, the detainee had the right to know the case against him and to make representations against his detention, with the aid of legal counsel, to an independent committee. The judiciary could verify compliance with the procedural safeguards. On a question as to why judicial review under the Internal Security Act was limited to procedural questions, it was noted that matters of national security were not justiciable in many jurisdictions. All detainees were treated in a humane manner and could receive regular family visits and access rehabilitative programmes. Preventive detention laws were important to address security challenges against which standard law and order responses were often unsuitable, such as crimes with organized elements and terrorist activities. 82. On the issue of sexual orientation, Singapore affirmed that all individuals were free to pursue their lifestyles, and recognition and success were based on merit. Lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender persons did not have to hide their sexual orientation for fear of losing their jobs or for fear of prosecution. Any person unfairly dismissed had legal recourse. On the issue of whether to decriminalize certain homosexual acts, that had been debated extensively, including in parliament but the decision had been taken to retain the status quo. Much of Singapore remained conservative, a fact which could not be changed by legislation alone. It was noted however that the police did not proactively enforce the provision unless other laws such as on indecent public behaviour or paedophilia were broken. 83. On the question of women prisoners, Singapore assured that measures were in place to protect their safety and acknowledge their special needs. Singapore would continue efforts to ensure a gender-sensitive approach. 84. On questions concerning freedom of peaceful assembly and association, Singapore explained that, in deciding the optimal balance between the exercise of political rights and stability, stability had to be given greater weight given that Singapore was a diverse and densely-populated city. Cause-related assemblies were generally regulated by permits. There was also a simple and transparent registration process for societies. Rejections were exceptional. This created a social climate in which civil society could flourish peacefully. 85. On media freedom, Singapore noted that freedom of speech was constitutionally guaranteed. As a knowledge-based economy, local media only formed part of the cosmopolitan and vibrant press scene of Singapore. Singapore was also one of the most connected countries in the world. The issue was really one of responsible press. The media’s role as a neutral forum, which reported fully and fairly, underpinned the country’s regulatory framework. Where newspapers had been sued, they had been sued for civil defamation and contempt. These actions were commonplace in common-law countries. Media freedom in a healthy democracy should not allow for scurrilous allegations of political corruption or judicial bias, or lies that denigrated character and reputation. Newspapers had not been prosecuted for criminal defamation in the 40 years since Singaporean independence. 86. On a question regarding the regulation of speech on racial and religious matters, the approach of Singapore was to use moral suasion, framed within the rule of law. The law was used only as a last resort. 87. On the issue of capital punishment, Singapore reiterated the absence of international consensus for or against capital punishment, including mandatory capital punishment. Singapore viewed the death penalty as a criminal justice issue. Capital punishment was only imposed for the most serious crimes, after due judicial process, and in accordance with the law. It was supported by the majority of Singaporeans. Singapore had one of the lowest homicide and heroin abuse rates in the world. Statistics on executions were published. 88. Singapore emphasized that its use of corporal punishment was within internationally accepted norms. Corporal punishment was only available for a specified list of serious crimes, and was not lightly imposed. Its imposition was subject to clear restrictions and conditions. On a question related to immigration offenders, Singapore noted that, due to its small size, it would be unwise to turn a blind eye to those who entered and remained in the country illegally. In 1989, when the Government had offered amnesty before a new law regarding corporal punishment for immigration offences entered into force, more than 12,000 people had turned themselves in. 89. Concerning suggestions for the establishment of an independent human rights institution, Singapore assured that it was firmly committed to the effective implementation of human rights at home through overlapping and mutually reinforcing forms of protection. Although Singapore was not currently party to any instruments that provided for individual communications procedures, legal remedies were available in appropriate cases through Singapore courts. Legal redress was supplemented by appropriate non-legal measures provided by both the public and private sectors. There were also existing inter-agency consultative mechanisms on human rights. At the regional level, Singapore worked closely with ASEAN, in particular through its Intergovernmental Commission on Human Rights and the Commission for the Promotion and Protection of the Rights of Women and Children. Through such mechanisms, Singapore shared its best practices and learned about ways to enhance rights protection. 90. Concerning a question on extending a standing invitation to special procedures, Singapore noted that it had received a number of visits, including by the Special Rapporteur on contemporary forms of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance in 2010. Singapore was open to further discussions, and visit requests would be considered on the merits of each proposal. It had also provided responses to questionnaires and communications from special procedures. 91. Regarding an independent electoral commission, Singapore noted that the crux of the issue was whether there was an agency that conducted its business in a fair and transparent manner and was trusted by the public. In the case of Singapore, that was the Elections Department, run by civil servants who carried out their work objectively and in accordance with the law. Civil servants were appointed and promoted according to civil service rules, so that they would be impartial in carrying out their duties, without fear of political interference. 92. Lastly, Singapore assured that the Government would continue to engage civil society in the follow-up after the universal periodic review, as it had in the preparation of the national report. As regards accession to further human rights treaties, the focus of Singapore was on the full and effective implementation of treaty obligations. Singapore emphasized that non-accession to a particular treaty did not mean that in practice its policies were not already largely in compliance with its provisions. Singapore confirmed its intention to ratify the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities next year and to consider other instruments, including the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, the Optional Protocol on the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography and ILO conventions. 93. Singapore appreciated the opportunity to engage in the review process and thanked all delegations for their comments and recommendations. Those would be considered in a positive spirit, with due regard to the needs of social harmony and the aspirations of its people. II. Conclusions and/or recommendations 94. The recommendations formulated during the interactive dialogue and listed below have been examined by Singapore and enjoy the support of Singapore: 94.1. Continue its commitment to advancing the lives of its people through the provisions of best education, housing and medical care, which has rightfully earned its international recognition (Brunei Darussalam); 94.2. Continue to take positive steps to enhance the enjoyment of economic, social and cultural rights, especially in the areas of health, education and the care of the disabled (the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea); 94.3. Continue applying programmes and measures aimed at ensuring universal access of its population to its excellent educational and health services and maintain the highest possible quality of these services (Cuba); 94.4. Continue its commitment in assisting the enrolment of poor children in education and ensuring their health care (Oman); 94.5. Continue its efforts in providing health care (Saudi Arabia); 94.6. Continue with its plans to guarantee the right to education (Saudi Arabia); continue the programme of the provision of quality education including new investments in the development of education (Zimbabwe); continue efforts in developing and improving the quality of education so as to preserve human dignity and development in the country (Qatar); 94.7. Continue taking effective policy and other measures to ensure adequate housing for its citizens, particularly in the lower income bracket (Malaysia); 94.8. Continue applying its socio-economic and development strategies and plans in the country (Cuba); 94.9. Continue to take proactive and innovative steps aimed at ensuring sustainable development policies related to the promotion of economic, social and cultural rights (the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea); 94.10. Build on its record and take additional measures to guarantee basic economic and social rights, such as in education and health, in particular for communities such as disabled, lower income persons and people living with HIV and AIDS (Botswana); 94.11. Continue its ongoing efforts for further promoting the rights of disabled people (Afghanistan); 94.12. Consider improving and protecting particular groups including disabled and elderly (Oman); 94.13. Continue its efforts in protecting the rights of specific groups such as women, children, the disabled, the aged and migrant workers (Brunei Darussalam); 94.14. Continue to strengthen efforts to protect the rights of foreign workers (India); 94.15. Continue efforts in protecting the dignity and safety of migrant workers, including through appropriate institutional and legislative measures (Nepal); 94.16. Continue to strengthen measures to promote the human rights of migrant domestic workers, including by seeking to further improve working conditions of domestic workers in Singapore (the Philippines); 94.17. Consider enhancing cooperation with countries of origin of migrant workers including on refining the process aimed at protecting such workers from exploitation, with a view to better managing the broad range of challenges in dealing with migrant workers (Malaysia); 94.18. Continue its positive engagement with neighbouring countries in combating trafficking in persons (Indonesia); continue the positive participation and coordination with neighbouring countries in the context of combating trafficking in human beings (United Arab Emirates); 94.19. Consider ratification of the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children, supplementing the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime (Belarus, Philippines); 94.20. Continue to carry out further measures to strengthen the harmony between different ethnic and religious communities (Viet Nam); continue with the successful policy of ensuring inter-ethnic and interreligious harmony in Singapore (Russian Federation); continue efforts in setting and implementing additional measures to enforce harmony and social cohesion between the different ethnic groups in the country (Qatar); continue its civic efforts at all levels, in particular at local levels, to promote racial and religious harmony (Pakistan); 94.21. Continue its efforts to promote and protect human rights while also safeguarding the institution of the family in all its component parts, and to preserve religious tolerance (Indonesia); 94.22. Continue efforts to promote and protect human rights while preserving the institution of the family in all its components and preserving religious tolerance, prioritize the maintenance of racial and religious harmony through delicate management of relations between the different races and religions and share best practices with other countries regarding the promotion of racial and religious tolerance (Algeria); 94.23. Continue its efforts to increase the representation of women at senior levels within the public administration, including the diplomatic service, judiciary and educational institutions, as well as the private sector (the Republic of Moldova); 94.24. Pursue its efforts to improve the status of women in order to enable them to reach their full potential and contribute to the social and economic development of the country (Algeria); 94.25. Continue developing its legal and institutional framework with respect to the promotion and protection of human rights (Afghanistan); consider developing further the legal and institutional framework with respect to the promotion and protection of human rights in the country (Malaysia); continue to develop the institutional and legal framework in respect of human rights (Jordan); 94.26. Continue to work to strengthen national human rights institutions, while consolidating the achievements in human rights (Nepal); continue to strengthen its human rights institutions and develop further measures to ensure the effective implementation of their mandates (Lesotho); 94.27. Continue its cooperation with the United Nations and other international organizations to develop its legal and institutional framework with respect to the promotion and protection of human rights in Singapore (Lao People’s Democratic Republic); 94.28. Further continue its stated policy of studying and reviewing its policy towards ratification of key international human rights instruments (Ethiopia); continue to carry out comprehensive reviews and studies on its existing legislation and level of preparedness, moving towards accession to international human rights instruments as it deems appropriate in the context of its institutional and legal framework, resources and national priorities (Indonesia); 94.29. Continue to undertake appropriate steps with a view to ratifying the human rights instruments mentioned in paragraph 158 of the national report (Bhutan); 94.30. Undertake concrete and appropriate steps towards ratification of and accession to international human rights instruments (Viet Nam); 94.31. Continue on its path of aligning its national legislation with its international obligations under the instruments to which Singapore is a State party (Afghanistan); 94.32. Accentuate measures to provide assistance, care and support to persons at risk of infection and those living with HIV/AIDS, through improved access to prevention, treatment and counselling services (Trinidad and Tobago); 94.33. Continue with its efforts to further promote and protect human rights and freedoms (Sri Lanka); 94.34. Engage the civil society in the follow-up process to the universal periodic review (Poland); 94.35. Establish an effective and inclusive process to follow up on the implementation of recommendations emerging from the universal periodic review (Viet Nam). 95. The recommendations formulated during the interactive dialogue and listed below have been examined and enjoy the support of Singapore, which considers that they are already implemented or in the process of implementation: 95.1. Maintain the momentum given to positive social policies relating to health care (Afghanistan); 95.2. Expedite implementation of the recommendations contained in the 2007–2011 Enabling Masterplan to improve the lives of persons with disabilities (Bhutan); 95.3. Accelerate effective implementation of the recommendations of the 2007–2011 Enabling Masterplan of the Ministry of Community Development, Youth and Sports and the National Council of Social Service to review and plan services for persons with disabilities (the Sudan); 95.4. Step up efforts in fighting trafficking of human beings (Belarus); 95.5. Take additional efforts in preserving inter-ethnic and interconfessional harmony in the country (Belarus); 95.6. Share positive experiences and best practices with other countries regarding racial and religious tolerance (Zimbabwe); 95.7. Intensify its efforts to eliminate all forms of discrimination against women, inter alia, by advocating and promoting women’s empowerment, and through capacity-building, gender-sensitivity training, and public awareness-raising activities (Indonesia); 95.8. Ensure gender-equality is enshrined in the Constitution (France); 95.9. Take further steps to ensure the representation of women in senior levels within the public and private sectors is increased (South Africa); intensify efforts to enhance women’s participation in the decision-making process in both public and private sectors, in accordance with the progress achieved in the field of education of women (United Arab Emirates); give the required attention to promoting women’s participation at the decision-making level in both the public and private sectors (Algeria); 95.10. Take measures to bring about a change in attitudes, with a view to eliminating stereotypes associated with traditional gender roles in the family and in society (the Republic of Moldova); 95.11. Ensure the incorporation into the domestic legal system of the principles and provisions of the Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC) (Egypt); 95.12. Increase attention to programmes for broken families (Oman); 95.13. Provide and improve training programmes on human rights for the judiciary and law enforcement personnel (Jordan); 95.14. Modify its legislation in such a way as to shift the burden of proof of the guilt of a person facing the death penalty to the prosecution instead of requesting the person to prove its own innocence (France); 95.15. Make available statistics and other factual information on the use of the death penalty (Finland); 95.16. Provide support for women prisoners with HIV/AIDS (Thailand); 95.17. Share experience and good practices with all other countries in the areas of development and protection of human rights (Lao People’s Democratic Republic). 96. The following recommendations will be examined by Singapore, which will provide responses in due time, but no later than by the eighteenth session of the Human Rights Council in September 2011: 96.1. Consider ratifying the outstanding international human rights instruments and further update domestic laws to be in line with the articles of those treaties (Lesotho); review its policies in order to accede to the core international human rights treaties to which it is not yet a party (Finland); consider, as appropriate, the accession to core human rights instruments (Jordan); 96.2. Consider ratifying other core international human rights instruments, starting with the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination (ICERD) and the instruments mentioned in paragraph 158 of the report, as well as the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families (ICRMW) (Algeria); continue to take appropriate measures at the national level with a view to ratifying international human rights instruments, notably those mentioned in paragraph 158 of the national report, including the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD), ICERD, the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography (OP-CRC-SC) (Morocco); Consider acceding to ICERD, OP-CRC-SC and CRPD (Swaziland); consider expediting becoming a party to ICERD, CRPD and OP-CRC-SC (India); 96.3. Accede to the following human rights instruments: CRPD, the ICERD and the OP-CRC-SC (Sudan); 96.4. Consider, within its vision, acceding to other core human rights treaties, including ICERD (Botswana); re-evaluate its policy on the ICERD (Trinidad and Tobago); 96.5. Accede to ICERD (Oman); ratify ICERD (Afghanistan); 96.6. Become a party to CRPD (Bhutan); become a party to both CRPD and its Optional Protocol and set a specific time frame for the ratification process (Thailand); 96.7. Accede to OP-CRC-SC (Iraq, Poland, Afghanistan); 96.8. Consider ratifying core international human rights treaties to which Singapore is not yet a party (ICCPR, the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR), ICERD), the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW), OP-CRC-SC, and CRPD with its Optional Protocol (Slovenia); 96.9. Consider acceding to ICESCR, the International Convenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (CAT), and ICRMW (Egypt); 96.10. Ratify ICCPR and ICESCR and other core international human rights treaties, such as CAT, CRPD and ICERD, and their optional protocols; and withdraw its reservations on key principles of CRC and CEDAW (Czech Republic); 96.11. Consider ratifying remaining core human rights treaties, namely: ICESCR, ICCPR, ICERD and CAT (Poland); 96.12. Include in its plan for ratification ICCPR and its two Optional Protocols, ICESCR, CAT, ILO Convention No. 87 (1948) concerning Freedom of Association and Protection of the Right to Organise, and ICRMW (Timor Leste); 96.13. Sign, ratify and implement ICCPR, ICESCR, ICERD, CAT and CRPD (United Kingdom); 96.14. Take measures towards signing and ratifying the ICCPR and the ICESCR as soon as possible (Japan); 96.15. Accede to ICERD and ratify ICCPR, as a matter of priority (Ghana); 96.16. Accede to instruments to which it is not yet a party, with priority given to ICCPR and the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court (France); 96.17. Study further and consider ratification of other international human rights treaties, namely: ICESCR, ICCPR, ICERD and ICRMW (Kazakhstan); 96.18. Consider signing and ratifying ICRMW (Indonesia); 96.19. Take measures in order to ratify the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children (the Republic of Moldova); 96.20. Consider withdrawing the reservations made on the two Conventions it has ratified (Finland); 96.21. Implement the recommendations of treaty bodies with regard to the implementation of Singapore’s commitments under CEDAW and CRC (Slovenia); 96.22. Establish a national human rights institution in accordance with the Paris Principles (Timor-Leste, Thailand, Poland, Egypt, Canada); 96.23. Take steps to create a national human rights institution in accordance with the Paris Principles (the Republic of Moldova); 96.24. Establish a national human rights institution accredited by the International Coordinating Committee of National Institutions for the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights (South Africa); 96.25. Establish an independent elections body (Canada); 96.26. Enhance cooperation with labour-sending countries to ensure foreign workers go through proper and legal channels to work in Singapore and continue efforts to protect the rights of all foreign workers from exploitation (Myanmar); 96.27. Strictly enforce relevant regulations including the Employment of Foreign Manpower Act and the Passport Act, which prohibit employers to hold on to passports, travel documents and work permits of their foreign workers (Thailand); 96.28. Extend the protection afforded by labour law to the entire range of domestic workers (Djibouti); 96.29. Adopt legal protection for migrant workers and enforce them, including with respect to wages and working hours, and address allegations of excessive agency fees and forced detention by “repatriation companies” (Canada); 96.30. Implement measures adopted to educate foreign workers, in their native languages, of their rights and responsibilities and avenues for assistance (Sri Lanka); 96.31. Continue its path of developing a financial system that will allow for assisting workers wishing to demand reparations in cases of litigation with their employer (Switzerland); 96.32. Address the concerns raised by the Special Rapporteur on contemporary forms of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance and xenophobia in relation to concerns about migrants and the living and working conditions of migrant workers, abolish corporal punishment for immigration offenders and enact an anti-discrimination law (United Kingdom); 96.33. Put in place measures to strengthen the protection of victims of trafficking: among others, to screen and protect victims of human trafficking instead of treating them as criminal offenders, to provide them with temporary shelters during legal proceedings, to support witness protection programs and to provide appropriate remedial measures other than deportation (Thailand); 96.34. Circulate and implement the United Nations Rules for the Treatment of Women Prisoners and Non-custodial Measures for Women Offenders (Bangkok Rules), which will further enhance administration of justice (Thailand); 96.35. Repeal or at least narrow the restrictions on public discourse on the issue of ethnicity, language, race, religion and politically sensitive issues in order to ensure the full enjoyment of freedom of expression and freedom of peaceful assembly and association (Slovenia); 96.36. Continue to engage with the United Nations special procedures and in particular positively respond to the invitation requests by the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights defenders and the Special Rapporteur on extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions (Czech Republic); 96.37. Harmonize its various strategies on children and families under a comprehensive national plan of action for children, and further consider the accession to OP-CRC-SC (the Republic of Moldova); 96.38. Adopt a comprehensive strategy addressing all forms of discrimination against all groups of children (Poland); 96.39. Establish an independent body monitoring the fulfilment of child rights empowered to receive and investigate complaints on the violations of the rights of the child (Poland). 97. The recommendations below did not enjoy the support of Singapore: 97.1. Declare an immediate moratorium on executions with the aim of abolishing the death penalty (Finland); impose as soon as possible a moratorium on the death penalty, with the view to its definitive abolition, in line with General Assembly resolution 65/206 (France); 97.2. Impose a moratorium on all executions and, eventually, abolish the death penalty and in this regard, ratify ICPPR and its second optional protocol (Switzerland); 97.3. Immediately impose a moratorium on executions, with a view to complete abolition of the death penalty; make public information about past executions and death sentences handed down by the courts; and review the Penal Code and the Misuse of Drugs Act, with a view to repealing all provisions on mandatory death sentencing and removing all presumption of guilt clauses (Czech Republic); 97.4. Support the international moratorium on death penalty executions with a view to abolition, and end the imposition of the mandatory death penalty (Canada); 97.5. Take steps towards the abolition of the death penalty and, during the process to abolish it, remove mandatory death sentences and release basic information about the death penalty, including the number of people sentenced to death and awaiting execution on death row (United Kingdom); 97.6. Remove from legislation the mandatory nature of the capital punishment for a number of crimes (France); repeal provisions for mandatory death penalty (Slovenia); 97.7. Immediately put a stop to caning as a form of punishment and repeal all laws providing for this punishment (Czech Republic); put an end in practice to all forms of corporal punishment and derogate the laws allowing for this practice (France); 97.8. Put an end to all practices of corporal punishment that takes place in educational facilities and detention centres (Djibouti); 97.9. Actively review the level of protection of children within the criminal justice system, through raising the age of criminal responsibility and avoid the trying of cases involving children between the ages of 16 and 18 in adult courts (Trinidad and Tobago); 97.10. Ensure that “preventive detention” under the Internal Security Act and the Criminal Law (Temporary Provisions) Act is only used in exceptional circumstances and does not violate the right to a fair trial (Slovenia); 97.11. Review existing provisions with regard to detention without trial and adopt new provisions to inform those detained of their right to counsel and guarantee their access to Counsel immediately upon arrest (Canada); 97.12. Repeal legal provisions criminalising sexual activity between consenting adults of the same sex (Slovenia); draw the consequences of the positive evolution of society with respect to homosexuality by abolishing the provisions of the Penal Code related to private relations between consenting adults (France); 97.13. Introduce legislation to make marital rape illegal in all circumstances (Canada); 97.14. Accept a visit by the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights defenders and the Special Rapporteur on extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions (Slovenia); 97.15. Consider issuing a standing invitation to special procedure mandate holders (Slovenia). 98. The recommendations above do not enjoy the support of Singapore for the reasons explained in the national report and during the interactive dialogue. 99. The following recommendations did not enjoy the support of Singapore as Singapore considers that they are based on incorrect assumptions or premises: 99.1. Review the de facto ban on peaceful public demonstrations, the use of anti-defamation laws; and the registration process for civil society and associations, to ensure that such laws, as adopted and enforced, are consistent with international human rights guarantees of the rights to freedom of expression, freedom of peaceful assembly, freedom of association (Canada); 99.2. Abolish the defamation law and ensure protection and promotion of the rights to freedom of expression and peaceful assembly and association through legislative reform and policy changes (Czech Republic); 99.3. Abolish the penal law on defamation and ensure, through legislative reform and political change, that freedom of expression, as well as freedom of association and peaceful assembly are guaranteed to all inhabitants, citizens or not, of the country (Switzerland); 99.4. Implement the 18 recommendations made by the International Bar Association’s Human Rights Institute in its 2008 report “Prosperity Versus Individual Rights” (United Kingdom); 99.5. Prohibit corporal punishment and put in place an educational system respectful of the physical and psychological integrity of minors (Switzerland); 99.6. Fully incorporate the principles and provisions of CRC into the domestic legal system, especially those regarding corporal punishment (Poland); 100. All conclusions and/or recommendations contained in the present report reflect the position of the submitting States and the State under review. They should not be construed as endorsed by the Working Group as a whole. Annex Composition of the delegation The delegation of Singapore was headed by H.E. Mr. Ong Keng Yong, Ambassador.at-Large, Ministry of Foreign Affairs and composed of the following members: • H.E. Ms. TAN Yee Woan, Ambassador and Permanent Representative, Permanent Mission of the Republic of Singapore in Geneva; • Ms. LIM Kheng Hua, Director (International Organisations), Ministry of Foreign Affairs; • Ms. Jacqueline POH, Divisional Director (Workplace Policy & Strategy), Ministry of Manpower; • Ms. Valerie THEAN Pik Yuen, Director (Legal Policy/Legal Industry), Ministry of Law; • Ms. SNG Siew Ping, Director (International Relations), Ministry of Home Affairs; • Mrs. TAN Hwee Seh, Coordinating Director (Corporate Management), Ministry of Community Development, Youth and Sports; • Mr. 	Syed Noureddin SYED HASSIM, Deputy Permanent Representative, Permanent Mission of the Republic of Singapore in Geneva; • Mr. Steven PANG, Deputy Permanent Representative, Permanent Mission of the Republic of Singapore in Geneva; • Ms. Deena BAJRAI, Counsellor (Legal), Permanent Mission of the Republic of Singapore in Geneva; • Ms. CHIA Choong Yeen, Counsellor (Labour), Permanent Mission of the Republic of Singapore in Geneva; • Ms. Tracy CHAN Su Yin, Deputy Director (International Organisations), Ministry of Foreign Affairs, • Ms.	 Davinia Filza BINTE ABDUL AZIZ, Deputy Senior State Counsel, (International Affairs Division), Attorney-General’s Chambers; • Ms. Cheryl LEE Shui Lene, First Secretary, Permanent Mission of the Republic of Singapore in Geneva; • Mr. SEAH Seow Chen, First Secretary, Permanent Mission of the Republic of Singapore in Geneva; • Ms. CHAN Yu 	Ping, First Secretary, Permanent Mission of the Republic of Singapore in New York; • Ms. Melanie CHNG, Senior Assistant Director (Legal Policy), Ministry of Law; • Mr. 	Jai Prakash RAMALINGAM, Assistant Director (Policy), Rehabilitation, Protection and Residential Services Division, Ministry of Community Development, Youth and Sports; • Ms. Gillian SIM, Assistant Director 	(Policy Development), Ministry of Home Affairs • Ms. Daphne YUAN, Assistant Director (Workplace Policy & Strategy), Ministry of Manpower; • Mr. Jaspal SINGH DHILLON, Senior Executive (International Policy), Ministry of Home Affairs; • Mr. Cedric TAN, Desk Officer (International Organisations), Ministry of Foreign Affairs; • Ms. Geraldine KUAH, Disability Policy Officer, Elderly and Disability Division, Ministry of Community Development, Youth and Sports. 