Distr.: General 24 March 2010 English Original: English/French General Assembly Human Rights Council Fourteenth session Agenda item 6 Universal Periodic Review Report of the Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review* Angola * Previously issued under document symbol A/HRC/WG.6/7/L.10. The annex to the present report is circulated as received. Contents 
Paragraphs Page Introduction............................................................................................................. 1–4 3 
I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process................................................ 5–86 3 
A. Presentation by the State under review........................................................... 6–16 3 
B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review........................ 17–86 4 
II. Conclusions and/or recommendations .................................................................... 87–88 13  Annex Composition of the delegation ......................................................................................................... 23 Introduction 1. The Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review, established in accordance with Human Rights Council resolution 5/1 of 18 June 2007, held its seventh session from 8 February to 19 February 2010. The review of Angola was held at the 10th meeting, on 12 February 2010. The delegation of Angola was headed by the Secretary of State for Foreign Relations, Georges Chikoty. At its 14th meeting, held on 16 February 2010, the Working Group adopted the report on Angola. 2. On 7 September 2009, the Human Rights Council selected the following group of rapporteurs (troika) to facilitate the review of Angola: Djibouti, Chile and Indonesia. 3. In accordance with paragraph 15 of the annex to resolution 5/1, the following documents were issued for the review of Angola: (a) A national report submitted/written presentation made in accordance with paragraph 15 (a) (A/HRC/WG.6/7/AGO/1); (b) A compilation prepared by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) in accordance with paragraph 15 (b) (A/HRC/WG.6/7/AGO/2); (c) A summary prepared by OHCHR in accordance with paragraph 15 (c) (A/HRC/WG.6/7/AGO/3). 4. A list of questions prepared in advance by Denmark, Hungary, Latvia, Sweden, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the Czech Republic, Germany, Norway, Argentina, Belgium and the Netherlands was transmitted to Angola through the troika. Those questions are available on the extranet of the universal periodic review. I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process 5. During the interactive dialogue, 56 delegations made statements. Recommendations made during the dialogue are found in section II of the present report. A. Presentation by the State under review 6. The Angolan delegation pointed out that since independence Angola had gone through various periods, which essentially could be summarized as follows: (i) from 1975 to 1992, when the country had defended its sovereignty and territorial integrity; (ii) from 1992 to 2002, when notwithstanding the post-election crisis, the basis for a multiparty system had been established through constitutional reform, and reforms were strengthened so as to establish a democratic State based on the rule of law; and (iii) from 2002 to 2009, when peace had been achieved and the national reconciliation and reconstruction processes had been consolidated. 7. Angola was now beginning a new era with the adoption on 5 February 2010 of a new Constitution, thus marking the end of the transitional period, and once and for all establishing a democratic State based on the rule of law. 8. Angola’s experience had shown that only peace, a State based on the rule of law and respect for individual rights and freedoms could provide the stability required for sustainable development, and thus for the enjoyment of economic, social and cultural rights. Between 2002 and 2008 Angola’s gross domestic product (GDP) had increased 2.6.fold, and annual average growth had reached 14.6 per cent. Per capita GDP levels and growth rates had also increased. The health system had grown from 965 health units in 2003 to 1,986 in 2008. Between 2003 and 2008, the number of primary and secondary health units had increased from 696 to 1,485, the number of health centres had grown from 162 to 317, and the number of provincial hospitals had risen from 52 to 132. The number of medical faculties had grown from one to six, including a private one, and the conditions had been established for the opening in seven academic regions of seven health technology institutes. Vaccination coverage had risen from 35 per cent in 2002 to 80 per cent in 2008. 9. In the education sector, the Government had launched the National Education Reconstruction Plan to rehabilitate, consolidate and expand the education system with the aim of achieving a primary gross enrolment rate exceeding 127 per cent in 2010 and a 77 per cent reduction in the illiteracy rate. As for special education programmes for disabled people, in addition to the projects under way, such as standardization of sign language and the establishment of a national centre to diagnose and monitor pupils with special education needs, 3,128 teachers were engaged in special education, but less than 50 per cent of the target population was covered. 10. While noting that Angola still had a long way to go, the delegation pointed out that the international community was itself aware of what needed to be done, in particular in terms of development funding and respect for commitments made at major international conferences. 11. The Angolan delegation mentioned the amendment of the Constitution Act, the signing of the peace agreements and more recently the approval and adoption of a new Constitution as three crucial factors defining the period covered by the national report. 12. Another factor that played an important role in deciding the report’s coverage period had been the decision by the United Nations Security Council to terminate the United Nations verification mission and to transfer all the work previously done by the United Nations Office for human rights to the resident coordinator, thus demonstrating that in Angola there was no longer any cause for concern about the protection of human rights. 13. In its national report Angola attached greater importance to rights related directly to the implementation of a Government strategy for combating poverty, the aim of which was to improve human development indices. But it did not disregard civil and political rights, for the following two reasons: rights were indivisible, and questions such as human dignity and rights, freedoms and guarantees were covered by the current Constitution. 14. The Constitution entrenched the prohibition of the death penalty and contained provisions to establish mechanisms to monitor and guarantee the right to life. Such fundamental rights, like others, were safeguarded by various laws, the basis of which was in keeping with international human rights treaties. 15. The judiciary played an important role in defending human rights. The national report dealt with the question of access to justice in comprehensive terms, emphasizing knowledge of the law, access to the courts and other forms of conflict resolution such as arbitration, mediation and conciliation, access to prompt justice, procedural and judicial safeguards, the dignity of the entire justice system and citizens’ trust in the system. 16. Lastly, the Angolan Government reiterated that it was aware that there was still much to be done to ensure progress, welfare and respect for human rights in the country. B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review 17. During the interactive dialogue, 56 delegations made statements. Additional statements by 21 delegations, which could not be delivered during the dialogue owing to time constraints, are posted on the extranet of the universal periodic review when available.1 18. A number of delegations noted with appreciation the adoption of a new Constitution, the ratification of several core international human rights instruments and the participation of women in the Government and Parliament, as well as the efforts to maintain peace and stability and to combat poverty in the country. 19. Kyrgyzstan welcomed Angola’s efforts to combat all forms of violence linked to the trafficking in women and children, and expressed appreciation for Angola’s efforts to create a national strategy for the promotion of gender equality. Kyrgyzstan stated that considerable work remained to be done to promote and protect human rights in Angola, but acknowledged that more time was required for the strengthening of its institutions. It made recommendations. 20. The Sudan noted the fact that Angola was party to many human rights instruments, as well as its efforts to combat poverty and social inequalities since peace had been achieved. The Sudan made recommendations. 21. Cuba referred to the exemplary actions taken by Angola to achieve its economic and social development and the well-being of its people. Cuba mentioned the important steps taken in the area of human rights. It pointed out the strategy that had been developed since 2003 to ensure speedy reduction in poverty, as well as its significant results. Cuba welcomed the measures undertaken to combat discrimination in various regions in the country. It also noted positively the increase in the health budget and the number of medical centres. Cuba made recommendations. 22. The Russian Federation noted with satisfaction the progress made by Angola in terms of post-conflict reconstruction, the development of democratic institutions, including the holding of parliamentary elections, and the resolution of the problem of settling refugees and internally displaced persons. The Russian Federation noted that Angola was facing serious problems and challenges and wished it every success in implementing its strategy for combating poverty. It made one recommendation. 23. Brazil recognized the positive trend in the ongoing progress of rapid economic growth. It asked Angola about the principal steps taken and the challenges identified with regard to economic, social and cultural rights, poverty, the right to housing and land use; the concrete steps taken to guarantee the rights of children and women, with attention to domestic violence, discrimination and HIV/AIDS; and the principal urgent needs identified with regard to cooperation focused on human rights. Brazil made recommendations. 24. The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea took note of the strategies for ensuring compulsory primary education for all children, eradicating illiteracy, enhancing health-care services and further improving the livelihoods of the population in urban and rural areas. The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea expressed appreciation for the Government’s policies aimed at accelerating national reconstruction and economic revitalization as part of its implementation of the Millennium Development Goals. The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea made recommendations. 25. Djibouti enquired about the constraints faced by Angola in implementing its policy and diversifying its economy, particularly in the areas of agriculture, fishing and industry. It noted with satisfaction the absolute priority accorded in the constitutional law to children 1 	Kazakhstan, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Saudi Arabia, Nicaragua, Equatorial Guinea, the Niger, Argentina, Burkina Faso, Tunisia, Latvia, Bangladesh, Cameroon, Zambia, South Africa, Cambodia, Mauritius, the United Republic of Tanzania, Ghana, Burundi, Kenya and Mozambique. and the 11 commitments undertaken in 2007 in partnership with United Nations agencies and other partners. It enquired about the resources made available to the inter-ministerial commission on freedom of religion and belief, which had proposed, inter alia, measures to counter accusations against children practising witchcraft. Djibouti made recommendations. 26. The Congo welcomed the commitment of Angola to promoting the fundamental rights of its people, which was shown in the economic, social and political policies adopted since 2000. It encouraged Angola to conclude its process of acceding to international human rights instruments to which it is not yet party. The Congo made one recommendation. 27. Algeria stated that the political and economic situation had constantly improved since the end of the civil war in 2002. The closure of the International Committee of the Red Cross office in Luanda was a sign of the irreversibility of the peace process and of reconciliation. A new Constitution had just been promulgated. Effective sectoral policies had permitted economic growth rates that were among the highest worldwide. Algeria made recommendations. 28. The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela noted the difficulties created by the lengthy armed conflict and other factors that continued to affect the right to education. It referred to the awareness campaigns to persuade parents to enrol both boys and girls in school, without any form of discrimination, in order to gradually reduce the dropout rate. Venezuela referred to the National Reconstruction Plan for the educational system, which sought to increase enrolment rates, and the Literacy Campaign, aimed at halving illiteracy by 2015. Venezuela made one recommendation. 29. Bahrain welcomed the efforts of Angola in terms of developing the school system, and noted the national plan for restructuring and reforming the educational system, increasing the level of enrolment at the primary and secondary levels and combating illiteracy, in particular among women. There was a centre for following up on students with special needs. Bahrain also welcomed the establishment of consultative centres for family planning, as well as the campaign aimed at combating violence against women. Bahrain made one recommendation. 30. Nigeria commended Angola not only for its efforts to promote and protect civil and political rights, but also for placing priority on economic, social and cultural rights. It called on the international community to enhance Angola’s capacity to promote and protect human rights. It encouraged the country to continue its reforms to improve policies and programmes, and to take the steps necessary to ratify or accede to the other principal international human rights instruments and treaties. 31. Hungary acknowledged Angola’s manifold efforts to improve the general situation of its detention system, but had learned by means of a recent assessment by the United Nations country team that that issue remained the most challenging area of the Angolan justice system. Hungary appreciated having further information about the Government’s intentions to consider and, it was to be hoped, carry out relevant country team recommendations during the process of revising the Constitution. Hungary made recommendations. 32. Turkey commended the establishment of a Justice Reform Commission that would adapt legal texts to international human rights instruments. It welcomed the adoption of the new Prison Act. It encouraged Angolan authorities to strengthen the mandate of the Ombudsman with respect to monitoring human rights. Turkey made one recommendation. 33. Belarus stated that Angola had accorded considerable attention to protecting the social and economic rights of its citizens, by ensuring the growth of the gross domestic product and by taking measures to protect the vulnerable parts of the population, to reduce unemployment, to address gender equality and to protect the rights of children. Belarus noted that Angola was determined to eliminate illiteracy, to ensure that access to education was as broad as possible, and that priority was placed on the development of health services and the construction of hospitals. Angola had also established a ministerial committee to combat trafficking. Belarus made recommendations.  34. France asked for information about the level of the implementation of the 2006 law on the press and, more generally, about planned measures to ensure transparency in the process of allotting radio and television frequencies. It also enquired about planned measures in the field of arbitrary arrest and detention, to ensure effective remedy, access to judicial aid and fair trial. France requested information about the measures taken to end violence against “witch children”, especially thorough awareness-raising programmes and the pursuit of perpetrators. France made recommendations. 35. Belgium expressed its concern at instances of abuse committed against irregular migrants by forces of law and order. It referred to reported cases involving death, family separation, sexual violence and the confiscation of goods during the eviction or detention of migrants. Belgium enquired about the measures that the Government intended to implement to ensure that there were no instances of abuse or ill-treatment when the forces of law and order expelled immigrants. It also asked whether the Government would commit itself to involving civil society in the implementation of the recommendations resulting from the present review. Belgium made recommendations. 36. The Czech Republic welcomed the good cooperation of Angola with international human rights mechanisms. It asked how Angola implemented in its national law the obligations arising from the treaties to which it was party. The Czech Republic made recommendations. 37. Egypt wished to be apprised of further information about the components of the Water for All project and the progress achieved in its implementation. Noting that the school enrolment rate for girls was lower than that for boys, Egypt asked the Angolan delegation to elaborate further about the measures taken to address that gap, given that the Government seeks to achieve free and compulsory education. Egypt made recommendations. 38. China appreciated the efforts and achievements made by Angola since 2002 in the field of stabilizing the political situation, developing the economy, increasing social security and welfare, improving health care and protecting vulnerable groups. China fully understood that Angola, as a developing country that had experienced much suffering, still faced many difficulties and challenges and was interested to know about Angola’s priorities in promoting and protecting human rights over the next few years. 39. Morocco noted with satisfaction Angola’s determination to strengthen its judicial and institutional structure in the area of human rights. The constitutional expression of that determination was seen in the new provisions guaranteeing citizens’ rights and the stability and unity of the country. Morocco made recommendations. 40. Norway stated that the participation of civil society was essential for a meaningful review process. It also stated that it was concerned about reports involving the intimidation, harassment and arbitrary arrest of human rights defenders and independent journalists. Norway made recommendations. 41. Azerbaijan asked what measures were being taken by the Government to protect displaced peoples. Azerbaijan made recommendations. 42. Pakistan welcomed the establishment of an inter-ministerial commission to deal with religious issues through a multidisciplinary approach. Pakistan referred to the strong presence of women in almost all public sectors as an indication of the country’s efforts to promote gender equality, equal treatment and non-discrimination. It made recommendations. 43. Iran commended Angola’s valuable efforts and commitments in the promotion and protection of human rights at the national level, which included achievements in the realization and enhancement of economic, social and cultural rights, the establishment of the Judicial Reform Commission and of a series of legal reforms regarding the judiciary and the prison system, and the significant improvements in terms of the right to life, liberty and security since the end of the conflict in 2002. Iran made recommendations. 44. Responding to the points raised by certain delegations, the Angolan delegation noted that most had made relevant recommendations. It reiterated Angola’s commitment since the end of the war to promoting human rights, and drew attention to the adoption of the new Constitution, which had marked the end of the transitional period under way since 1992. 45. Considerable economic progress had also been made, which had made it possible to guarantee a number of social rights, in particular in the fields of education and health. As for the rights of the child, women’s rights, domestic violence, HIV/AIDS, housing and land-use rights, subjects raised by Brazil, the Angolan delegation referred to the information on page 10 of its report. 46. Brazil’s recommendation that Angola should accede to the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment and its Optional Protocol and the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, aiming at the abolition of the death penalty, would be given due consideration. 47. The death penalty had been abolished in Angola in 1991. 48. A law ensured freedom of the press; the press was free in Angola. There were several newspapers and radio stations, and the law must be observed by all. The law on freedom of expression must not serve as a pretext for violating the law. 49. In Angola there was freedom of religion, and citizens were able to freely practise their beliefs. 50. There was no more arbitrary detention in Angola. In certain specific cases, the law made provision for pretrial detention to make it possible to carry out investigations. 51. As for the rights of the child, children were protected by the law. The issue of children involved in “witchcraft” was extremely complex, as it related to accusations made by communities against children in those same communities. The Government had responded by establishing a national commission involving various participants, including the populations concerned. 52. Regarding intimidation of journalists and human rights defenders, the Government was not involved in such practices. In the past, journalists had sometimes been prosecuted for writing articles offensive to a number of persons. 53. As for persons expelled from Angola, in September and October 2009 there had been some incidents between Angola and the Democratic Republic of the Congo involving Congolese citizens who had been illegally mining diamonds in a region of Angola, some of whom had been armed. Such illegal mining of diamonds could give rise to serious incidents and even conflicts, as had occurred in the past in a number of West African countries. It had thus been necessary to expel such persons, and the number expelled had reached 60,000. That had not been the first time there had been expulsions; some 300,000 had previously been expelled. Angolan citizens living in the Democratic Republic of the Congo too had been expelled. The issue was currently being addressed bilaterally by the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Angola, also with the participation of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) for refugee-related matters. 54. Angola’s economy had previously been mainly dependent on oil, owing to the political situation faced by the country. Now Angola had begun to reverse that trend with the gradual rehabilitation of agriculture, industry and all other economic sectors, including tourism, so as to diversify the economy and reduce the country’s dependence on oil. 55. Canada commended the Government for having developed legislation and policies that promoted gender equality, and for having established a national strategy regarding domestic violence. Canada was encouraged by the engagement of the Angolan people and the peaceful atmosphere in which the previous year’s elections had been held. It welcomed the adoption of the new Constitution and expressed the hope that the Government of Angola would utilize its provisions to improve the well-being and democratic rights of all Angolans. However, it was disappointed that OHCHR had had to cease its activities in Angola as a result of Angola’s decision not to sign an agreement for human rights promotion and protection activities. Canada made recommendations. 56. Referring to inheritance and property rights, Ireland enquired whether the Government was considering the possibility of amending or altering legislation that was discriminatory towards women. It enquired about the actions taken to eliminate domestic and gender-based violence and about the status of the Domestic Violence Bill. Ireland requested information about the measures taken to protect human rights defenders in law and practice. Ireland made recommendations. 57. The United States of America commended Angola’s cooperation with the Working Group on Arbitrary Detention in 2008, but remained concerned that suspects had been subjected to torture while in detention, including incommunicado detention. The United States noted that defamation continued to be a criminal offence, that journalists continued to be harassed and that, in most areas, citizens could gain access only to Government-controlled or pro-Government media organs. It remained concerned about the trafficking in women and children and stated that domestic initiatives to address that problem had so far proved ineffective. The United States also remained concerned about reports indicating that Congolese migrants being deported from Angola were subject to abuse, including rape, by its military and police forces. It made recommendations. 58. Portugal noted with appreciation the Angolan National Strategy to Prevent and Reduce Violence against Children and wished to receive further information about it. It also expressed appreciation for all the Government’s efforts to promote the right to education and welcomed the significant social housing projects. Portugal made recommendations. 59. Mexico welcomed the will of the Angolan Government to create a culture of human rights within the country. In view of the situation of vulnerable groups, Mexico asked for further information about the progress made in the reform of the criminal code and about measures taken to eliminate discrimination against minors with disabilities and to prohibit corporal punishment and the trafficking in minors, and measures aimed at the registration of children at birth. It also requested information about measures to promote and protect women’s rights. Mexico made recommendations. 60. Referring to alarming public reports, Germany asked how the Angolan Government was addressing the concerns raised as a result of the violence committed against deportees by Angolan security forces at the Congolese border. Germany made recommendations. 61. The United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland welcomed Angola’s commitment to the abolition of the death penalty. It stated that, as part of the process of joining the Human Rights Council in 2007, Angola had pledged increased support for and cooperation with the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, but that it was disappointed to hear that OHCHR had been obliged to cease its operations in Angola. It also expressed concern about reports concerning increased restrictions on freedom of expression, association and assembly, as well as State control over civil society organizations. The United Kingdom made recommendations. 62. The Netherlands was concerned about widespread domestic violence and noted that the Government had created family counselling centres to assist victims. The Netherlands was also concerned that, despite efforts undertaken by the Government, access to justice remained limited and the judiciary weak. It noted that forced evictions had reportedly taken place without prior notice or the provision of alternative housing or adequate compensation. The Netherlands regretted that OHCHR had ceased its activity in 2008, after the authorities had announced their decision not to sign a comprehensive agreement for human rights promotion and protection. The Netherlands made recommendations. 63. Malaysia was encouraged to note that many positive efforts had been taken to ensure respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms in the country. However, it noted that certain areas could benefit from greater attention, such as, inter alia, the issue of the trafficking in persons, especially women and girls, sexual exploitation and child prostitution. Malaysia made recommendations. 64. India acknowledged the challenges and constraints of Angola in guaranteeing human rights in the wake of a long civil war. It took positive note of the significant progress towards the consolidation of peace made in the brief period of relative stability over the past few years, namely, the holding of multiparty general elections in 2008 and the promulgation of a new Constitution. It noted the increased public investment in the social sector and the considerable impact that it had had in the crucial areas of health care and primary school enrolment, as well as the progress that had been made with regard to gender equality. India encouraged Angola to continue to strengthen its judicial administration and penal systems and to expand the participation of civil society in all policy processes. It also urged Angola to establish a national human rights institution and requested information about the new mining code and about any additional measures to curb the trafficking in children. 65. Spain very much welcomed the possibility that Angola would sign the Second Optional Protocol to ICCPR, aimed at the abolishment of the death penalty, and the adoption of the project entitled “Water for All”, with the collaboration of the United Nations Children’s Fund, the United Nations Development Programme, the International Organization for Migration and the International Labour Organization. Likewise, Spain welcomed the possibility that Angola would shortly sign ICERD and CAT. It also invited Angola to intensify its awareness-raising campaigns regarding sexual violence and its training programmes on human rights for national officers. Spain made recommendations. 66. Australia welcomed the fact that peace had been maintained since 2002, but was saddened by the recent attack on the Togolese football team in the Cabinda enclave and remained concerned by ongoing reports of the arbitrary arrest, detention, intimidation and harassment of human rights defenders. It encouraged Angola to address child trafficking and labour and accusations of child witchcraft. It expressed concern about slum clearance, forced eviction and insufficient protection for internally displaced persons. It referred to the issues of maternal mortality, gender-based violence, HIV/AIDS infection and lack of humanitarian access to prisoners. Australia made recommendations. 67. Lebanon commended the efforts made by Angola since 2002 to overcome the devastating and painful effects of decades of civil war, which had been preceded by colonial domination. It welcomed the Government’s plan to embark on judicial reforms. Lebanon made recommendations. 68. Uruguay noted the important initiatives undertaken by Angola in this developing stage, despite its difficulties in terms of resources and the enormous obstacles that it had been obliged to overcome in recent years. Uruguay congratulated Angola on the Fourth Childhood Forum, organized by the National Children’s Council in June 2009, and requested further information about its conclusions. Referring to the forced evictions and the concerns expressed by CESCR and the Special Rapporteur on housing, Uruguay requested a balance between the need for appropriate urban planning and respect for the right to housing. Uruguay made recommendations. 69. Chad encouraged Angola to continue its efforts to promote and protect human rights. It made recommendations. 70. Slovenia commended Angola for the increase in primary school enrolment in recent years. Nonetheless, Slovenia was concerned about the reported situation faced by women, especially widespread gender-based violence, commercial sexual exploitation and high maternal mortality rates. It was also concerned at the lack of protection for children from violence, abuse and exploitation. Slovenia asked Angola whether it would revise the constitutional law on gender equality and women’s rights, and when it would adopt the National Action Plan to combat the trafficking in children. Slovenia made recommendations. 71. The Democratic Republic of the Congo welcomed the establishment of provincial committees, a “Promoter of Justice”, a national council for the family and a national council for children as mechanisms for protecting and promoting human rights. It praised the activities aimed at reorganizing the civil registry to facilitate the registration of births and of adults following the war. As Angola was a post-conflict country, the Democratic Republic of the Congo requested clarifications as to the difficulties encountered in reintegrating its demobilized soldiers and how the Government had managed to resolve them. The Democratic Republic of the Congo made one recommendation. 72. Sri Lanka noted the General Labour Act, which guaranteed to women equal treatment and non-discrimination. It stated that the efforts to resettle displaced persons and demobilized soldiers, as well as the clearance of anti-personnel mines, were commendable. Sri Lanka also praised the efforts taken to guarantee compulsory primary school education. It made recommendations. 73. Philippines acknowledged that, despite the challenges that Angola faced in ensuring comprehensive human development, the country was committed to strengthening human rights. Angola needed the continued assistance of the international community in providing free high-quality education and basic health care to its people. Philippines congratulated Angola on having abolished the death penalty and on its initiatives concerning disabled persons’ rights. Philippines made recommendations. 74. Botswana expressed confidence in Angola’s commitment to a constructive dialogue in the universal periodic review process and to the broader human rights agenda. Referring to the challenges faced by the country, it shared its conviction that there would be enhanced support and cooperation on the part of the international community. Botswana made recommendations. 75. The Republic of Korea expressed appreciation for the ongoing reform efforts and asked about the measures taken to ensure the independence of the judiciary. It acknowledged Angola’s efforts to strengthen its cooperation with United Nations human rights mechanisms. However, the recent discontinuation of OHCHR activities in Angola was not in line with that cooperation. Korea made recommendations. 76. Zimbabwe fully understood Angola’s full commitment to the promotion and protection of human rights after the country had overcome a grim past. Zimbabwe made recommendations. 77. While acknowledging that the percentage of women in Angola’s National Assembly was among the highest percentages of women serving in such positions in Africa, Japan inquired about the follow-up to the recommendation made by the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women regarding measures and legislation concerning violence against women. It encouraged the acceleration of efforts to reform the judicial system and noted that a low number of registered births seemed to be an impediment to preventing the trafficking in children. Japan made one recommendation. 78. Ethiopia stated that significant gains had been achieved in terms of economic growth, infrastructure development and the expansion of social services and that, if that trend continued, Angola would most likely achieve the Millennium Development Goals. Ethiopia made recommendations. 79. Sweden welcomed the ratification of ICCPR but remained concerned at the continuous reports from non-governmental organizations and the United Nations raising concerns with regard to the impartiality of the judicial system and the lack of sufficient resources. Sweden was also concerned at indications by civil society regarding the use of torture in places of detention and at the fact that the living standards and conditions in prison were insufficient. It made recommendations. 80. Côte d’Ivoire encouraged Angola to continue its processes of national reconciliation, reconstruction and the reintegration of former soldiers. Côte d’Ivoire also encouraged Angola to continue and step up its special education programmes for persons with disabilities, in order to improve their living conditions. It made recommendations. 81. Slovakia stated that it was pleased with the progress made in the security situation since the end of the civil conflict, and it commended Angola for having abolished the death penalty. Slovakia made recommendations. 82. Despite the considerable efforts that Angola had taken to attain its objectives, Senegal noted that Angola still had to address a number of challenges, particularly those of an economic nature, which impeded the realization of its ambitions. Senegal stated that the international community must do more to help Angola in that endeavour. It made recommendations. 83. Iraq noted efforts made in the area of judicial reform to improve courts and the situation in prisons. It asked for further information about judicial mechanisms for the protection of migrants, in view of the existence of a law concerning the protection of the rights of migrants in Angola. Iraq made one recommendation. 84. Italy welcomed the increase in primary school enrolment in Angola, but noted that girls’ access to school was still significantly hampered by social prejudice. It referred to reported cases involving torture, ill-treatment, extrajudicial execution and the excessive use of force by police. Italy expressed concern about widespread gender-based violence. It made recommendations. 85. The Syrian Arab Republic stated that the growing investment in basic social sectors demonstrated Angola’s capacity to achieve positive gains for its vulnerable population. Syria made one recommendation. 86. In its concluding statement, Angola thanked all the delegations which had spoken to express their support, make recommendations or give encouragement. The delegation reiterated the commitment of the Government of Angola to remain in the front line of the noblest of endeavours – promoting and protecting human rights. II. Conclusions and/or recommendations 
87. The following recommendations will be examined by Angola, which will provide responses in due course, but no later than the fourteenth session of the Human Rights Council, to be held in June 2010. The responses made by Angola to those recommendations will be included in the outcome report adopted by the Council at its fourteenth session. 1. To consider ratifying ICERD, CRPD, CAT, the Optional Protocols to ICCPR (OP-2), to CAT and CRPD, the Rome Statute, the Palermo Protocol and the Convention for the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide (Brazil); 2. To ratify the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and the Protocol thereto to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children (Djibouti); 3. To consider heeding the appeals to proceed with the ratification of the remaining core human rights treaties, including ICERD, CAT and CRPD (Hungary); 4. To continue to accede to international human rights instruments, including the Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and the Additional Protocol thereto on the prevention and punishment of trafficking in persons (Belarus);  5. To accede to CED (France); 6. To ratify the Second Optional Protocol to ICCPR, designed to abolish the death penalty (Belgium); 7. To ratify CAT, as it committed itself to do when elected to the Human Rights Council (Belgium); 8. To accede to CAT and the Optional Protocol thereto (Czech Republic); 9. To accede to ICERD and CAT (Azerbaijan); 10. To ratify the 2000 United Nations Trafficking in Persons Protocol (United States of America); 11. To act on the recommendations of the Working Group on Arbitrary Detention, and to ratify CAT (United States of America); 12. To sign and ratify the Optional Protocol to ICESCR as soon as possible (Portugal); 13. (As one of the main co-authors of resolution 62/149 on the moratorium on the use of the death penalty) to accede to the Second Optional Protocol to ICCPR (Portugal); 14. To ratify ICERD, CAT, ICRMW, CRPD and CED (Mexico); 15. To accede to CAT and the Optional Protocol thereto (Germany); 16. To ratify CAT (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland); 17. To sign and ratify CED, the Optional Protocol to ICESCR, CRPD and the Optional Protocol thereto (Spain); 18. To continue the process of ratifying various human rights conventions (Chad); 19. To consider the ratification of core human rights instruments such as ICERD, CAT, ICRMW and the Second Optional Protocol to ICCPR (Philippines); 20. To consider ratifying ICERD, CAT and CRPD and the Optional Protocol thereto, as a further step towards fulfilling its pledge to advance human rights (Republic of Korea); 21. To step up the accession process under way and the ratification of a number of international instruments, in particular ICERD, CAT and CRPD and the Optional Protocol thereto (Côte d’Ivoire); 22. To become party to ICERD (Pakistan); 23. To step up the process under way to ensure its accession to all relevant international human rights instruments (Senegal); 24. To join CRPD in order to protect persons with disabilities in Angola (Iraq); 25. To enact specific laws to prohibit and punish all forms of trafficking in persons, to increase the capacity of law enforcement officials to identify and protect victims, and to systematically collect data on trafficking offences and prosecution efforts (United States of America); 26. To adapt domestic legislation to the international normative framework (Chad); 27. To continue to work to improve national mechanisms for the promotion of human rights (Kyrgyzstan); 28. To establish a fully independent national human rights institution, in accordance with the Paris Principles (France); 29. To establish a national human rights institution in keeping with the Paris Principles (Pakistan); 30. To establish an independent, non-partisan and Angolan-led human rights commission in the country (Canada); 31. To explore the possibility of establishing an independent national human rights institution, in accordance with the Paris Principles (Malaysia); 32. To establish an independent national human rights institution (Philippines); 33. To develop a policy aimed at strengthening the judiciary branch (Brazil); 34. To submit overdue reports to United Nations treaty bodies (Norway); 35. To expedite the presentation of its pending reports to the relevant treaty bodies (Pakistan); 36. To consider extending a standing invitation to United Nations human rights special procedures (Brazil); 37. To extend and implement a standing invitation to human rights special procedures (Czech Republic); 38. To extend an open and standing invitation to all special procedures (Spain); 39. To extend a standing invitation to all Human Rights Council special procedures (Slovakia); 40. To facilitate visits requested by the Special Rapporteurs on adequate housing, freedom of opinion and expression, and independence of judges and lawyers, and to cooperate with the United Nations country team in improving the implementation of obligations (Norway); 41. To resume cooperation with OHCHR in order to receive technical assistance in strengthening and ensuring the independence of the judiciary, guaranteeing access to justice for all citizens, and establishing mechanisms and institutions at the national level that are effective in promoting and protecting human rights and fundamental freedoms (Mexico); 42. To increase its cooperation with OHCHR, as pledged before its accession to the Human Rights Council (United Kingdom); 43. To reconsider its decision not to sign a comprehensive agreement with OHCHR aimed at human rights promotion and protection (Netherlands); 44. To favourably consider resuming, as soon as possible, cooperation with OHCHR in Angola (Republic of Korea); 45. To ensure more equal distribution of wealth derived from natural resources (Kyrgyzstan); 46. To take legislative measures to explicitly prohibit all forms of discrimination, in particular against children with disabilities, girls and children belonging to the San communities, and to effectively protect children accused of witchcraft (Czech Republic); 47. To continue the good work of providing legislation and policies for gender equality in keeping with international obligations, in particular with regard to violence against women and their heritage rights, and providing policies aimed at women’s education, health and equal access to training and labour markets (Norway); 48. To continue its efforts to promote gender equality, equal treatment and non-discrimination (Pakistan); 49. To step up its efforts to eradicate negative practices and stereotypes that lead to discrimination against women (Azerbaijan); 50. To invite international mechanisms, in particular those for the strengthening of gender equality, women’s rights, children’s rights and the elimination of all forms of discrimination (Mexico); 51. To introduce, in collaboration with civil society organizations and public personalities, measures aimed at ensuring women’s right to non-discrimination and equality, as proposed by the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women (Germany); 52. To increase its activities aimed at strengthening and promoting women’s role in society (Algeria); 53. To strengthen its policy aimed at the full guarantee of children’s rights, with attention to the implementation of the Guidelines for the Alternative Care of Children, in accordance with Human Rights Council resolution 11/7 and General Assembly resolution 64/142 (Brazil); 54. To continue to focus and work on the promotion and protection of women’s rights in all fields (Bahrain); 55. To take the measures necessary to combat violence against women (Azerbaijan); 56. To take steps to ensure that its legislative and policy frameworks provide effective protections against all forms of violence faced by women, and that such protections are extended to all women, including internally displaced and refugee women, who are among the most vulnerable (Canada); 57. To ensure the speedy passage and enactment of the Domestic Violence Bill through parliament as a matter of urgency (Ireland); 58. To take steps to address and eliminate gender-based violence (Ireland); 59. To strengthen and intensify its actions to prevent and reduce violence against children (Portugal); 60. To enact legislation on domestic violence as soon as possible, to further strengthen family counselling centres that assist victims, and to increase the availability of legal aid throughout the country for victims of violence (Netherlands); 61. To consider the possibility of drafting specific legislation on violence against women, including domestic violence and sexual abuse; to intensify the public awareness campaign in that regard; to develop a human rights training and education programme for public officers; and to offer legal services for victims (Spain); 62. To strengthen its efforts to fulfil its obligations under CEDAW (Australia); 63. To enact legislation on violence against women, and to intensify its efforts to curb gender-based violence (Slovenia); 64. To remain steadfast in pursuing its impressive policies aimed at gender equality, particularly by strengthening measures to curb gender-based violence and by reducing maternal mortality (Botswana); 65. To effectively address the problem of domestic violence, especially against women, including by approving the Domestic Violence Bill currently under discussion in parliament (Italy); 66. To expeditiously take the actions necessary to combat the negative phenomenon of violence against children, and to provide efficient rehabilitation and reintegration schemes for victims (Slovakia); 67. To take steps to ensure that all child labour is ended (Ireland); 68. To strengthen efforts to enact the existing legislation on child labour (Italy); 69. To take all social, educational and legal measures necessary to address the phenomenon of children accused of witchcraft (Italy); 70. To strengthen its efforts to fulfil its obligations under CRC (Australia); 71. To step up its efforts to prevent arbitrary detentions, and to investigate all cases involving arbitrary arrest, detention and torture and bring to justice those responsible (Azerbaijan); 72. To take appropriate measures to ensure that torture does not occur in cases of detention, to improve the overall conditions for persons in detention, and to sign and ratify CAT and the Optional Protocol thereto (Sweden); 73. To take the measures necessary to address the situation related to the absence of a control mechanism for detention procedures, in accordance with international human rights standards (Slovakia); 74. To align domestic legislation on detention with international standards and, in particular, to ratify CAT (Italy); 75. To continue its reform and humanization of the prison system, and to strengthen training programmes for prison administration staff in various categories (Morocco); 76. To adopt measures to improve conditions for prisoners and detainees (Germany); 77. To define the trafficking in human beings as a criminal offence (Azerbaijan); 78. To enact appropriate legislation against the sale and trafficking of children (Pakistan); 79. To accelerate the implementation of training and information programmes for law enforcement officers with a view to combating and suppressing the trafficking in women and girls, and to establish child protection networks to that end (Malaysia); 80. To consider enacting specific legislation to combat human trafficking (Philippines); 81. To take appropriate action to establish a juvenile justice system (Slovenia); 82. To continue the legal reform process in accordance with the provisions of the newly adopted Constitution (Cuba); 83. To continue to reform its judicial and legal system in keeping with the provisions of the recently adopted Constitution (Djibouti); 84. To consider taking all measures necessary to ensure humanitarian access to prisoners, and to fully abide by its international obligations concerning consular help provided to foreign nationals in detention (Hungary); 85. To continue its efforts to improve the justice and legal systems in accordance with the newly adopted Constitution (Egypt); 86. To continue the process of reform begun in the legal system, in conformity with the recently adopted constitutional provisions (Morocco); 87. To take effective measures aimed at reinforcing the capacities and the independence of the justice system, and to facilitate visits by the Special Rapporteur on the independence of judges and lawyers (Azerbaijan); 88. To continue its efforts to improve legal and institutional reform to ensure that an effective system for the administration of justice and the provision of access to justice are put in place (Iran); 89. To address shortcomings in the judicial process, in particular the length of pretrial detention, humanitarian access to prisoners, financing, independence from the Executive, and corruption (Australia); 90. To pursue efforts to embark on judicial reforms that would help to modernize the human rights system, and to align its law with international legal instruments to which Angola is party (Lebanon); 91. To continue its ongoing initiative to conduct a complete overhaul of the justice and legal systems, in accordance with provisions enshrined in the recently adopted Constitution (Sri Lanka); 92. To work to conclude the reforms of the justice system (Zimbabwe); 93. To take sufficient measures to ensure the impartiality and transparency of the judicial system, allocating sufficient funds to ensuring its effective functioning (Sweden); 94. To continue the process of reforming the judicial system, in keeping with the provisions of the new Constitution (Côte d’Ivoire); 95. To take all measures necessary to provide adequate access to justice and enhance the protection of its civilian population from violence (Germany); 96. To undertake further legal and institutional reforms to ensure an effective system of administration of justice (Netherlands); 97. To adopt further effective measures and policies aimed at increasing the number of registered births (Japan); 98. To ensure that articles 70 and 71 of the Penal Code are not construed and applied so as to criminalize homosexuality (France); 99. To decriminalize consensual same-sex activity between adults (Czech Republic); 100. To strengthen the protection of journalists against harassment, attacks and arbitrary detention, and to establish fair and transparent licensing procedures for private radio and television, and ensure supervision by an independent body, as stated in the press law, in order to prevent discriminatory licensing practices and enhance the diversity of information throughout the country (Czech Republic); 101. To ensure respect throughout the country for freedom of expression, and to improve the working conditions for the press and radio broadcasting (Norway); 102. To decriminalize press offences, and to create an action plan aimed at greater media freedom and plurality of media (United States of America); 103. To take steps to ensure that the 2006 Press Law is fully enacted and that independent reporting is recognized (United Kingdom); 104. To pursue an open dialogue with human rights defenders, in particular in Cabinda, where, in the aftermath of the recent deplorable attack on the Togolese football team, human rights defenders are reportedly being detained without evidence as to their complicity (Norway); 105. To put in place and enforce measures to protect human rights defenders (Ireland); 106. To guarantee human rights defenders full legitimacy and protection, in accordance with the United Nations Declaration on Human Rights Defenders (Slovakia); 107. To clarify the procedures for the establishment and recognition of associations and non-governmental organizations, and to guarantee their participation in the reform process (France); 108. To ensure that the procedures for the registration of civil society organizations are transparent, non-discriminatory and expeditious (Norway); 109. To ensure that opposition parties and civil society organizations are permitted to participate freely in the political process, without fear of retribution (Canada); 110. To respect the activities of civil society organizations, and to ensure that any action taken to regulate human rights organizations is not politically motivated, but based on legal provisions consistent with international human rights standards (United Kingdom); 111. To continue to improve the social security system (Kyrgyzstan); 112. To continue efforts to ensure safe drinking water, in order to achieve the goal of 80 per cent of the population or more by 2012 (Sudan); 113. To continue its efforts in the field of health, despite constraints, with the assistance and cooperation of the international community (Sudan); 114. To allocate additional resources to improving the country’s health infrastructures, while ensuring that ongoing health reforms take into account the rights of women and children (Canada); 115. To continue its laudable measures to fight poverty and combat diseases such as HIV and AIDS (Botswana); 116. To continue to promote solidarity among all regions and provinces in the country in order to ensure sustainable and harmonious economic and social development (Cuba); 117. To continue to implement measures aimed at guaranteeing universal access to health services (Cuba); 118. To consolidate its plans for peace, stability and reconstruction, and to accelerate the implementation of its programmes for persons with disabilities so as to guarantee their physical, social and economic rehabilitation and the enjoyment of their other fundamental rights (Syrian Arab Republic); 119. To successfully implement its national strategy for combating poverty (Russian Federation); 120. To continue its efforts to improve the living conditions of the people, including by creating the resources necessary to realize the right to adequate housing (Democratic People’s Republic of Korea); 121. To continue its effort to achieve Millennium Development Goals with a view to improving the situation, particularly in economic and social terms (Democratic People’s Republic of Korea); 122. To take opportunities, offered within the framework of international cooperation and assistance, to step up its development programmes and its programmes to fight poverty and ensure reconstruction (Algeria); 123. To continue to develop the country’s economic potential and ensure a dignified standard of living for its citizens, and to adopt further measures necessary to increase the level of access to education and health (Belarus); 124. To consider as a priority the most vulnerable groups in its population, in particular women and children (Belarus); 125. To continue its 2003 programme aimed at combating poverty, in order to guarantee social peace and fight against exclusion, particularly in rural areas (Morocco); 126. To consider partnership in the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative, as a measure against corruption and a means towards poverty reduction (Norway); 127. To continue its policies aimed at diversifying its economy, placing particular emphasis on agriculture, fisheries and manufacturing (Islamic Republic of Iran); 128. To continue the full implementation of the Angola Strategic Poverty Reduction Programme with a view to mitigating the social and economic impacts of the war (Islamic Republic of Iran); 129. To fully implement the Strategic Poverty Reduction Programme (Lebanon); 130. To carry out indispensable urban rehabilitation and reconstruction in accordance with the relevant legislation and internationally accepted human rights standards (Portugal); 131. To adopt legislative measures strictly defining the circumstances and safeguards related to eviction, and to stop all forced evictions until such measures are in place (Netherlands); 132. To consider intensifying efforts to achieve further gains in the areas of poverty reduction; the right to adequate housing; the right to health, water and basic sanitation; and the right to education for all sectors of society (Malaysia); 133. To step up efforts to diversify its economy, including in the areas of agriculture, fisheries, manufacturing and construction (Malaysia); 134. To extend an invitation to the Special Rapporteur on the right to adequate housing, in order to obtain independent advice concerning the development of legislation and policies in accordance with international standards (Spain); 135. To take the measures necessary to ensure that eviction is a last resort, and to adopt legislation and guidelines that strictly define the relevant circumstances and safeguards for the moment when an eviction is carried out (Uruguay); 136. To provide the necessary assistance to evicted persons, especially members of vulnerable groups, including women, children and the elderly (Uruguay); 137. To invite the Special Rapporteur on adequate housing to assist, as part of the effort to ensure a dignified standard of living, in the process of creating or reforming legislation and policies to bring them into conformity with international standards (Uruguay); 138. To tirelessly pursue the reconstruction of this vast and beautiful country without neglecting its human and economic potential (Democratic Republic of the Congo); 139. To continue its policy aimed at diversifying its economy, with the objective of enhancing economic and social rights and the Angolan people’s right to development (Sri Lanka); 140. To continue to seek the assistance of the international community to help upgrade its educational system, improve health services and provide adequate housing, drinking water and sanitation to its citizens (Philippines); 141. To build on the momentum achieved this far in the construction of social housing, with a view to reversing the housing deficit (Zimbabwe); 142. To scale up efforts to provide high-quality goods and services, especially in the areas of education and health (Zimbabwe); 143. To implement social safety net programmes and increase funding for seniors and the handicapped (Zimbabwe); 144. To continue to implement its national policies and programmes regarding poverty reduction, with coordinated and robust international cooperation and assistance (Ethiopia); 145. To continue its initiatives to guarantee and preserve food self-sufficiency in order to increase the well-being of its population, especially those who are most vulnerable (Senegal); 146. To continue the implementation of strategies for ensuring the achievement of Millennium Development Goals, in particular with respect to promoting health, combating HIV/AIDS, increasing the vaccination of the population through the expanded vaccination programme, and reducing the illiteracy rate (Senegal); 147. To place priority on the vital area of education, especially the education of girls in rural areas (Algeria); 148. To continue to strengthen its policies aimed at increasing the enrolment rate in primary and secondary education, and to implement the measures necessary to achieve the Millennium Development Goals in terms of reducing illiteracy rates (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela); 149. To continue to reinforce policies aimed at improving enrolment rates at primary and secondary schools (Turkey); 150. To devise plans and strategies for guaranteeing the right to education and providing girls with equal access to education (Egypt); 151. To develop a programme for education and human rights training, as that could enhance the capacity of all stakeholders, including civil society, to facilitate such activities and ensure greater awareness among citizens with regard to human rights (Morocco); 152. To enforce or institute mechanisms for ensuring that the first grade of school is free for all children (Ireland); 153. To take further measures to improve the quality of the basic education system by increasing the number and the training of teachers, to increase the school attendance rate at the secondary level, to decrease dropout rates, to combat child labour and to prevent discrimination against young girls (Portugal); 154. To step up efforts to promote and protect the right to education and children’s rights, including by improving literacy rates and enrolment rates in primary and secondary education (Philippines); 155. To take further measures aimed at consolidating its achievements with regard to expanding education to disadvantaged areas, by according special attention to the rights of girls, especially in nomadic communities (Ethiopia); 156. To step up the implementation of programmes aimed at reducing illiteracy, as part of the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals (Côte d’Ivoire); 157. To actively promote access to education for young girls (Italy); 158. To take steps to ensure that all deportations are conducted in coordination with the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and that all returns respect the human rights and the dignity of migrants (United States of America); 159. To take the steps necessary to improve the situation of deportees and asylum-seekers (Germany); 160. To raise the awareness of the security forces with regard to the national law applicable to the rights of asylum-seekers and refugees (Chad); 161. To take measures to end internal displacements, and to undertake social housing and land reform initiatives that benefit low-income, vulnerable and marginalized individuals living in informal settlements (Canada); 162. To immediately cease, in accordance with the Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement (1998), all forms of forced displacement (Australia); 163. To seek the assistance of the international community so that it can build its capacities and can fulfil its obligation regarding the promotion and protection of its people’s human rights, in particular in economic, social and cultural terms, on the basis of its national priorities (Egypt); 164. To seek the technical assistance of the international community in order to address challenges in the field of human rights (Congo); 165. To establish an effective and inclusive process for following up on the recommendations resulting from the present review (Norway); 166. To accomplish the human rights goals set out in Human Rights Council resolution 9/12 (Brazil). 88. All conclusions and/or recommendations set out in the present report reflect the positions of the submitting State(s) and/or the State under review. They should not be construed as endorsed by the Working Group as a whole. Annex Composition of the delegation The delegation of Angola was headed by the Secretary of State for Foreign Relations, Georges Chikoty, and was composed of 26 members: • Alves Monteiro, Vice-ministre de la Justice • Arcanjo do Nascimento, Représentant Permanent de l’Angola auprès de l’Office des Nations Unies et des autres Organisations Internationales à Genève • Raul Manuel Danda, Député à l’Assemblée Nationale • Eufranzina Maiato, Député à l’Assemblée Nationale • Mário de Azevedo Constantino, Département ONU/Mirex • José Silva, Conseiller à cette Représentation Permanente • Joana de Jesus, Direction Europe/Mirex • Manuel Domingos, Assesseur du Vice-ministre • Paulo Conceição, Expert à la Mission Permanente d’Angola Ministère de la Justice • Luíza Buta, Département des Droits de l’Homme Ministère de l’Intérieur • Armindo Aurélio, Assesseur du Ministre • Carlos Diamantino de Concição, Département du Control Pénal • José Sibi, Assesseur du Vice-ministre • Silvia Lunda, Bureau d’Echange International Ministère de l’Education • Mário Homero, (INIDE) • Dácia da Conceição, (INIDE) • Onylasor Neto, Bureau d’Echange International Ministère de la Culture • Aguinaldo Guedes Cristóvão, Directeur du Cabinet Juridique • Manuel João Fernando, Directeur de l’Institut National des Affaires Religieuses Ministère de la famille et Promotion de la Femme • Adriano Gaspar, Directeur des Affaires Juridiques Ministère de l’Urbanisme • Georges Domingos Kioza Ministère de l’Agriculture • António Fragoso Santos • Ana Pena Procureur Général de la République • Maria Teresa Manuela, Procureur Provincial • Manuel Bambi, Procureur Adjoint 