  United Nations  A/HRC/22/4    General Assembly  Distr.: General 12 December 2012  Original: English  Human Rights Council Twenty-second session Agenda item 6 Universal Periodic Review   Report of the Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review*  * The annex to the present report is circulated as received.   Argentina Contents  Paragraphs Page   Introduction .............................................................................................................  1–4 3  I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process ................................................  5–98 3   A. Presentation by the State under review ...........................................................  5–22 3   B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review ........................  23–98 5  II. Conclusions and/or recommendations .....................................................................  99–100 14  Annex   Composition of the delegation .........................................................................................................  23 Introduction 1. The Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review (UPR), established in accordance with Human Rights Council resolution 5/1 of 18 June 2007, held its fourteenth session from 22 October to 5 November 2012. The review of Argentina was held at the 2nd meeting, on 22 October 2012. The delegation of Argentina was headed by Juan Martín Fresneda, Secretary of Human Rights. At its 10th meeting, held on 29 October 2012, the Working Group adopted the report on Argentina. 2. On 3 May 2012, the Human Rights Council selected the following group of rapporteurs (troika) to facilitate the review of Argentina: Austria, Philippines, Uruguay. 3. In accordance with paragraph 15 of the annex to resolution 5/1 and paragraph 5 of the annex to resolution 16/21, the following documents were issued for the review of Argentina:  (a) A national report submitted/written presentation made in accordance with paragraph 15 (a) (A/HRC/WG.6/14/ARG/1);  (b) A compilation prepared by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) in accordance with paragraph 15 (b) (A/HRC/WG.6/14/ARG/2);  (c) A summary prepared by OHCHR in accordance with paragraph 15 (c) (A/HRC/WG.6/14/ARG/3). 4. A list of questions prepared in advance by Mexico, the Netherlands, Norway, Slovenia, and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland was transmitted to Argentina through the troika. These questions are available on the extranet of the UPR.  I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process  A. Presentation by the State under review 5. The Secretary of Human Rights of Argentina stressed that the Council had refined its procedures to ensure maximum efficiency in the analysis of the human rights situation in the world. The Council, through the UPR - as it was also intended in Argentina - sought to put the person at the centre, as a subject of rights, and to change the paradigms driven by market dictatorship and the absence of the State. 6. Argentina had recovered her dignity as a country through a national and popular project that transformed the structures of an unequal society, establishing the current development process, which included and protected the weak. 7. Argentina lived through two recent tragic experiences, which explained the State’s current commitment to promote and protect human rights. On the one hand, a society that suffered under a terrorist State that perpetrated crimes against humanity in the 1970s was going through a process of memory, truth, justice and reparation. On the other hand, Argentina experienced an economic, social and political tragedy that broke out in the crisis of 2001 because of a State that was absent for more than a decade, and where the loss of labour rights and opportunities for the most vulnerable were considered as variables to adjust in order to achieve economic growth. 8. Since its first review in 2008, Argentina carried out efforts to consolidate the process of justice for crimes against humanity committed in the 1970s. The goal was to reaffirm the idea that no one was above the law. The pillars of memory, truth and justice were deeply rooted in Argentine society. Since 2005, 923 people had been prosecuted, 331 people convicted, and there were 17 ongoing trials, with 5 more scheduled. This has allowed Argentina to advance a broader human rights agenda that can be summarized as a fight for real equality. 9. In this context, the democratization of information and communication had been essential. A new law on audiovisual media services posits freedom of expression as a social right. The State intervenes to regulate and restrict the monopolistic concentration of the media while ensuring access to the public sphere and freedom of expression for all social sectors. Three years after the enactment of thelaw, 50 universities had a TV signal; there were 1,150 municipal radio stations; 130 radio stations for schools; 20 radio licences for indigenous peoples; and 50 cable licences for cooperatives. In the same spirit, the Congress enacted the repeal of the criminal libel and slander on the grounds of public interest, eliminating any possibility of prosecuting those who expressed their views about public affairs. 10. It would not be possible to advance towards the democratization of rights and real equality without active policies implemented by the State. As a result, poverty had been sharply reduced from 54 per cent of the population in 2003, to 6.5 per cent for 2012; while indigence had diminished from 27 to 2 per cent. 11. The Government had promoted the recovery of labour rights and encouraged collective bargaining. The State had recognized the historic debt generated by decades of neglect towards the most vulnerable sectors of the population. This had been made operative through a retirement-mobility procedure. Pensions had been extended to 2.5 million people, through an unprecedented fiscal effort. 12. Regarding human trafficking, the State was coordinating strategies to combat this transnational crime.  For instance, since the establishment of the Ministry of Security in December 2010, the federal forces rescued 889 victims. 13. As regards the protection of the rights of children and adolescents, Argentina had also advanced. Law 061 established that children were full subjects of rights. Additionally, the Government had adopted other standards such as education funding, prohibition of child labour and equal legal age of marriage. 14. For the first time, investment in education represents 6.2 per cent of GDP. More than 1,400 new schools had been built and 2 million computers had been distributed. 15. The active policies to promote rights were being complemented by a paradigm shift in accessing justice that included other forms of non-judicial justice; 38 Access to Justice centres had been established, especially in lower-income areas. 16. The delegation reported that, after the first-cycle UPR review, the Act on Integral Protection Prevention, Punishment and Eradication of Violence against Women was adopted and regulated by a presidential decree after an extensive consultation process. This legislation addressed the issue of gender-based violence in a comprehensive manner and provided a broad response to the problem according to the standards of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW) and the Convention of Belém do Pará. Currently the Congress was discussing the incorporation of the crime of femicide into the Criminal Code. 17. The delegation mentioned the equal marriage and gender-identity laws as a fundamental step towards equality and the extension of the collective rights of those groups that had been historically discriminated against on the ground of sexual orientation. The Equal Marriage Act allowed marriage between same sex adults and the possibility of adoption. The Gender Identity Act guaranteed that every citizen could change his/her name, photo and sex in his/her identity documents. 18. Regarding immigration policy, the regulation of the Immigration Act of 2010 recognized the principles of family reunification and the contribution of migrants to the enrichment and strengthening of the cultural and social fabric of Argentina. 19. On the issue of health, there was also progress to report to the Council. Argentina had regulated health provision by private actors and had created the Compulsory Medical Program, which established mandatory benefits that private operators  could not circumvent. Likewise, the new mental health law guaranteed the rights recognized in various international instruments and provided a framework for public policy in this area, with the patient’s integration into the community. In the field of bioethics, the "death with dignity" law, adopted in 2012, allowed refusing the artificial extension of life. 20. With regard to indigenous peoples, legislation had been adopted, including Act 26,637, which called for indigenous participation in the drafting of a bill on community property, established the Office of Indigenous Rights, and which granted powers to the State to order the return of human remains to their communities. With regard to indigenous lands, while continuing to expand the application of law 26,160, an emergency Law on the Ownership of Land was adopted in December 2011. This legislation establishes that land was not a commercial good but a strategic and non-renewable resource which should be preserved. Likewise, there was an initiative to incorporate a new title in the chapter of property rights of the draft unified Civil and Commercial Code recognizing the indigenous community as the sole subject having right to communal indigenous property. 21. The delegation acknowledged that, despite many achievements, there were still concerns regarding human rights, such as the situation of detainees. The process of aligning legislation with international human rights standards was not over. Argentina was working on the establishment and implementation of methods and tools that respect the rights of persons deprived of liberty, in dialogue with civil society. 22. The State hoped to promptly inform the Council about the adoption of the national mechanism for the prevention of torture, which had been approved by one chamber of Congress. Argentina had promoted that its provinces also establish their own mechanisms of prevention. The provinces of Chaco, Rio Negro, Tucuman and Mendoza passed legislation creating mechanisms to prevent torture; while bills were under consideration in the provinces of La Pampa, Buenos Aires, Santa Fe and Neuquen.  B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review 23. During the interactive dialogue, 57 delegations made statements. Recommendations made during the dialogue are to be found in section II of the present report. 24. Cuba welcomed advances in implementing the UPR recommendations of 2008 and positive changes in the normative framework. It noted advances in combating discrimination and gender violence, as well as measures to guarantee the right to food and universal social security and health coverage. Argentina reached the highest level of employment in its history and increased the education budget. Cuba made recommendations. 25. Belgium welcomed Argentina’s ratification of the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR-OP2) and efforts to promote transitional justice mechanisms. While noting positive human rights developments, Belgium was concerned at the lack of a public information law and of an independent body to consider information requests; and widespread trafficking in persons, particularly affecting women and children as identified by the Special Rapporteur. Belgium made recommendations. 26. The Plurinational State of Bolivia recognized achievements to combat discrimination through its National Institute against Discrimination, Xenophobia and Racism (INADI) which designs and promotes policies and measures. Bolivia appreciated the recognition of indigenous persons’ rights through legislation and legal services addressing discrimination which is exacerbated by structural weaknesses and institutional deficiencies in the justice system, including racist perceptions by justice officials.  Bolivia made recommendations. 27. Brazil highlighted the integration measures for foreigners, including labour rights and social programmes; the “Patria Grande Programme”, and the regulations of the new migration law. Brazil noted the advances on the right to truth as well as Argentina’s policies to reduce poverty. Brazil encouraged Argentina to ensure the effectiveness of such policies. Brazil made recommendations. 28. Bulgaria noted positive changes in the normative and institutional framework and the development of the National Human Rights Plan and National Programme in 2010. It also noted the United Nations country team (UNCT)’s observation that Argentina had made major efforts to combat discrimination against women at all levels/by strengthening the legislative framework, introducing institutional mechanisms and implementing public equality policies. Bulgaria made recommendations. 29. Canada noted that in 2008 Argentina had agreed to promote the use of alternative measures to pretrial detention, in particular for pregnant women and children.  It requested Argentina to provide information on such measures, their implementation, pervasiveness and results. Canada expressed concern about the safety and security of witnesses in trials and encouraged the Government to take efforts for their protection. Canada made recommendations. 30. Chile welcomed progress on prison conditions, women’s political participation and eradication of violence against women. It particularly noted the new accommodation facilities, prison population reorganization, women’s participation in the Senate Commissions and Lower Chamber Presidencies, and the enactment of Law 26,485 on violence against women. Chile commended Argentina’s policy on past human rights violations based on memory, truth and justice. It made recommendations. 31. China welcomed Argentina’s great efforts at promoting employment and improving health and education. It noted that Argentina attached great importance to promoting gender equality and that women’s status in political and economic life had greatly improved. China expressed appreciation for Argentina’s active protection of the rights of vulnerable groups such as children, disabled and indigenous peoples. China made a recommendation. 32. Costa Rica congratulated Argentina for its advances and its commitment to human rights and the universal periodic review. It commended Argentina for the high level of political representation and economic participation of women. It recognized positive developments on memory, truth and justice in relation to State terrorism during the last dictatorship, and advances pioneered by Argentina at the Human Rights Council. It requested information on the national torture prevention mechanism. Costa Rica made recommendations. 33. Belarus welcomed that Argentina had acceded to new human rights instruments and had voluntary provided an interim report on UPR recommendations. It noted chronic human rights problems, including: discrimination against indigenous peoples, migrant workers and stateless persons; poor detention conditions; many cases of disappearances; torture and the low number of investigations into such crimes. Belarus made recommendations.  34. Cyprus commended Argentina’s efforts to combat impunity for past human rights violations, particularly in the period between 1976 and 1983. Cyprus thanked Argentina for its contribution to the development of the right to truth as an autonomous right and for sponsoring resolutions on the right to truth, all of which have been adopted by consensus, in the Council. Cyprus made recommendations. 35. Ecuador recognized the achievements in employment, social security, pension rate adjustments and universal access to health. It highlighted the improved education system and increased budgets for school infrastructure. It recognized the role of women at all levels. Ecuador welcomed progress made in defending human rights of migrants, including in the legislative and regulatory framework. Ecuador made recommendations. 36. France noted Argentina’s ratification of ICCPR-OP2 and the Convention on the Rights of Disabled Persons (CRPD). France welcomed Argentina’s combat against enforced disappearances and its inclusion in the Criminal Code; its justice and memory work; and its political will to complete the trials on atrocities committed during the dictatorship. It congratulated Argentina’s law on violence against women but was concerned about sexual and reproductive rights’ restrictions. It made recommendations. 37. Germany commended Argentina for its continued commitment to ensuring the highest respect for human rights in the country. Germany noted with appreciation Argentina’s efforts to come to terms with the past of the military dictatorship. Germany made recommendations, including with reference to the media and press as well as to recommendations made by the Special Rapporteur on adequate housing. 38. Greece commended Argentina for the Gender Identity Act and the amendment of the Civil Code which promote significantly the rights of lesbian, gay, bisexual and transsexual (LGBT) people and asked about other intended measures to combat discrimination against LGBT people in practice. Greece also welcomed measures taken to address violence against women and positive efforts regarding the rights of indigenous peoples. Greece made recommendations. 39. Honduras recognized Argentina’s cooperation with the international human rights system, highlighting the ratification of the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture (OP-CAT). Honduras commended the measures taken to bring the juvenile criminal system in line with international human rights standards and the Act 26,061on Comprehensive protection of the rights of boys, girls and adolescents, encouraging Argentina to strengthen its follow-up programme to implement such instruments. Honduras made recommendations. 40. Hungary congratulated Argentina for progress on the rights of persons with disabilities and commended improved prison conditions. It expressed concern over lack of separation between different types of inmates. Hungary welcomed the bill to establish a national mechanism for the prevention of torture and requested more information and proposed the sharing of best practices. It requested information on why Argentina was not party to the 1961 Convention on the Reduction of Statelessness. Hungary made recommendations. 41. India noted laws passed to ensure the rights of citizens and was encouraged by innovative initiatives in education. India, while acknowledging the efforts in promoting women’s rights, noted the equal importance of bridging the gap between legislation and reality. India commended Argentina on improved prison conditions. India made a recommendation. 42. Indonesia commended Argentina for ratifying all international human rights instruments and for its standing invitation to all special procedures, showing strong commitment to human rights and cooperation with international mechanisms. Indonesia welcomed efforts: in combating discrimination against women by strengthening the legislative framework, introducing institutional mechanisms and implementing public equity policy; as well as in combating trafficking in persons. Indonesia made recommendations. 43. Iraq welcomed achievements in acceding to international instruments and the invitation to all special procedures resulting in several visits to Argentina. Iraq noted specific measures to further human rights, combat unemployment, promote social security and for economic improvement. Iraq welcomed efforts to combat discrimination and racism and to encourage participation by women in political decision-making. Iraq made recommendations. 44. Italy welcomed progress in prosecutions related to the last military dictatorship. Italy has explored trilateral cooperation possibilities. Italy referred to concerns over detention conditions, particularly in the provinces, and encouraged continued improvement of prison conditions. Regarding reported police violence affecting vulnerable persons, Italy requested information on human rights education and other initiatives taken, and on measures envisaged for improved combatting of trafficking in human beings. 45. Jordan commended Argentina for its efforts on human rights and fundamental freedoms and its foreign policy with respect to peace, security, democracy and human rights. It recognized efforts to strengthen the institutional framework and the establishment of several Government agencies and initiatives. It encouraged continued support to such initiatives. Jordan made a recommendation. 46. Libya noted progress in policies for equality and for combating racial discrimination and encouraged increasing such efforts. It commended Argentina on increased effort in combating human trafficking, on providing information to the public, assistance to the victims and punishing the perpetrators. Libya made a recommendation. 47. Malaysia noted Argentina’s continued commitment to human rights and the ratification of almost all international human rights instruments. It noted improvements in social security, pension benefits, employment, the empowerment of women, inclusion of persons with disabilities, children, education and others. Malaysia recognized that challenges remained, including over trafficking of persons and compliance with ratified instruments. Malaysia made recommendations.  48. Mexico acknowledged Argentina’s efforts to advance on truth, justice and reparations for violations during the last dictatorship and encouraged avoiding re-victimization and providing witness protection. Mexico commended adoption of migration regulations and the ratification of human rights treaties. Mexico was confident that measures towards eradicating discrimination against women and LGBT persons would strengthen human rights in Argentina. Mexico made recommendations. 49. Morocco welcomed Argentina’s commitment to human rights and commended its cooperation with United Nations bodies, highlighting Argentina’s co-authorship of several Human Rights Council resolutions. It noted improvements in the prison system and requested further information on gender programmes in prison. Morocco congratulated Argentina for its efforts on women’s representation and law 26,485 combating violence against women. Morocco made recommendations. 50. The Netherlands expected Argentina to finalize and effectively implement legislation for the establishment of the national mechanism for the prevention of torture. The Netherlands commended Argentina on results attained for the participation of women in political life. While noting that laws and regulations implemented to counter discrimination and violence against women, the Netherlands referred to the overall impression that perpetrators of such violence were not sufficiently prosecuted and punished.  It made recommendations. 51. Nicaragua commended Argentina’s human rights progress and normative and institutional changes on protection issues. Nicaragua recognized improvement in combating discrimination against vulnerable sectors, particularly women’s empowerment. Nicaragua expressed concern over people of African descent. It noted reports on lack of housing for 80 per cent of the rural population, requesting more information on the Procrear plan. Nicaragua made a recommendation. 52. Norway expressed concern over gender-based violence. It commended the united register for domestic violence cases. Norway expressed concern over unsafe abortions resulting from the criminalization of abortion. It requested more information on civil society participation in the UPR report-writing process. It referred to reported concerns over public access to public information. Norway made recommendations. 53. The delegation recalled that Argentina used as a reference the United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners and the decision of the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights on principles and good practices for the protection of persons deprived of liberty. The State applied to detainees the same policies of human rights as to the rest of the population, on the premise that the only freedom that was restricted was freedom of movement. The State coordinated between various instances in order to improve the quality of life of detainees and had opened prisons to the community. The State worked with various civil society organizations in this regard. Also, several prisons had been built or were under construction in order to reduce overcrowding. Currently, at the federal level, there were more places in prisons than prisoners, which allowed a better management and classification of detainees. 54. The delegation noted that 70 per cent of those arrested were able to work, 65 per cent received education and 90 per cent participated in cultural activities or sports. 55. Furthermore, on the basis of the new mental health law and the programme “Prisma”, prison psychiatric units were closed and persons with mental illnesses were treated fairly by health-care staff. 56. Regarding torture, while the establishment of the National Preventive Mechanism  was still pending, the penitentiary authorities had established, in cooperation with civil society organizations, monitory programmes for the prevention of torture in correctional facilities. Any civil society organization could conduct an inspection to detention centres without previous notice. This was supplemented by courses of prevention and punishment of torture for the management of prisons, as recommended by the Inter-American Court of Human Rights. Finally, through roundtables with civil society, the penitentiary authorities had also drafted protocols to prevent violent situations in units of young adults and on how to conduct searches. 57. Regarding indigenous peoples, the delegation noted that the 2010 national census of population and housing had included indigenous and African self-identification. The results reflected around a million people of Indian descent and some 70,000 people of African descent. The results allowed the formalization of individual policies for each of these groups. 58. The delegation stated that the current administration had enacted laws that implemented ILO Convention No. 169 on indigenous and tribal peoples in independent countries (1989), and mentioned as examples the norm on intercultural bilingual education and the demarcation of indigenous land. On this last point, more than three and a half million hectares had been assessed and 14,000 evictions were prevented. Similarly, within the general policy of implementing the right to housing, there were specific programmes for indigenous communities. 59. The delegation pointed out that the draft Civil Code incorporated the right to identity and name in indigenous languages and a close follow-up of the births of children belonging to indigenous peoples. 60. On children and adolescents in conflict with the law, the delegation recalled that article 19 of the regulation of the law, incorporating the Convention on the Rights of the Child into Argentine legislation, integrated all international standards in the area, in particular the Havana, Beijing, Riyadh and Tokyo Rules. Argentina had also a central federal office dealing with children and adolescents in conflict with the law in order to raise the standards in all Argentine jurisdictions. 61. As for children with disabilities, the national census had reported that 5 per cent of children of Argentina suffered some permanent difficulty; 85 per cent of these children received education and many of them were part of the regular education system. Besides, the universal child allowance was tripled in cases of a child with disabilities and the non-contributory pensions were also increased in cases of disability. 62. Regarding the Ombudsman for Children, the delegation explained that the issue was still under legislative debate, but that, in the meantime, the protection and defence of children was guaranteed. The delegation also stressed that the issuance of the first national identity document was free. 63. On sexual and reproductive health, the delegation reiterated that free and universal access to contraception was guaranteed in Argentina.  For its part, the technical guide on non-punishable abortion prepared by the Ministry of Health had been revised and updated in order to explain in which cases a court order to perform an abortion was not necessary.  More than half of the Argentine provinces used the technical guide or considered it as a reference to prepare their own. However, the most prominent development in this area was the 2012 decision of the Supreme Court which settled the legal discussion on what was considered a non-punishable abortion in Argentina’s legislation. That ruling had already been confirmed and applied in other cases. 64. On human trafficking, the delegation reported that there was an office and a programme of rescue and assistance for victims of trafficking since 2008 and 2012,  respectively. 65. Regarding violence against women, in addition to the law and regulation of 2010, the judiciary established in 2008 an office to ensure prompt access to justice for victims and prepare statistical data. 66. Oman recognized the attention Argentina paid to implementing recommendations and the work done to respect international obligations through cooperation with all stakeholders. Oman made recommendations. 67. Pakistan noted the new laws and institutional measures in human rights over the past four years strengthening human rights infrastructures. It requested more information on Law No. 551, which decriminalized libel and slander in public interest cases. Pakistan appreciated advancements in promoting social, cultural and economic rights, particularly in health and education. Pakistan requested more information on the Prepaid Health-Care Plan Act. It made recommendations. 68. Palestine congratulated Argentina on its progress and ongoing commitment in all areas of human rights and in combating discrimination against women at national, provincial and municipal levels through bolstering normative frameworks, institutional mechanisms and public equality policies. Palestine however took note of the need to strengthen these mechanisms and to establish planning tools for equality. Palestine made recommendations. 69. Peru recognized Argentina’s commitment to promoting and protecting human rights. It highlighted the increase in public education and investments to provide safe drinking water and sanitation; the adoption of a comprehensive act on preventing, sanctioning and eradicating violence against women; and the establishment in 2011 of the Dr. Fernando Ulloa assistance centre for victims of human rights violations. Peru made recommendations. 70. Portugal commended Argentina for progress on recommendations and ratification of human rights instruments and would appreciate similar commitments to humanitarian law instruments. It hoped closing the gap between legislation and reality on human rights of women would continue as a priority, recognizing adoption of the Violence against Women Act. It encouraged progress on rights of the child to be transposed to the provinces. It made recommendations. 71. The Republic of Moldova welcomed Argentina’s commitment to the promotion and protection of human rights and commended it for approving its national human rights plan. It congratulated Argentina on combating discrimination against women, on its endeavours to combat all forms of violence against children, particularly corporal punishment, as well as trafficking, particularly in women and children. It made recommendations. 72. The Russian Federation commended Argentina for its success in protecting all categories of rights for its citizens and for protecting democratic values in human rights. It recognised the Government of Argentina’s efforts in ensuring social security rights for low-income citizens as well as its encouragement and protection for the rights or migrants and national minorities. It made recommendations. 73. Singapore noted the high literacy rates and life expectancy of Argentinians resulting from the Government’s continued efforts in promoting education and enhancing the public health-care system. Progress in the empowerment of Argentinian women was also noted, along with the enactment of a comprehensive law to enhance protection and deter violence against women and concrete steps taken to address human trafficking, especially for the purpose of sexual exploitation. It made recommendations. 74. Slovakia commended Argentina for progress achieved in strengthening promotion and protection of first generation human rights. The search for truth and justice was positively perceived in relation to serious human rights violations during Argentina’s military past. Slovakia welcomed the advances made in addressing discrimination against women, especially in relation to political participation, and the ratification of the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on communication (OP-CRC-IC). It made recommendations. 75. Slovenia welcomed Argentina’s ratification of all major international human rights treaties, including the the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (OP-ICESCR). Argentina has made significant progress in implementing specific recommendations from the first UPR cycle. A gender perspective has been included in the UPR follow-up process. Less progress has been achieved on the recommendation on prison conditions. Argentina was encouraged to make further efforts to ensure that the compatibility of the juvenile justice system with the CRC. Slovenia made recommendations. 76. South Africa recognized progress made in establishing institutional mechanisms, enacting laws to protect the rights of indigenous peoples and children and strengthening protection in the area of violence against women. It referred to the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination’s concern pertaining to persistent discrimination against people of African descent. Persistent challenges remained in ensuring effective consultation of indigenous peoples. Argentina was encouraged to strengthen efforts in combatting the trafficking of women and children and in implementing mechanisms on ensuring the right to adequate housing, including for migrant workers. It made recommendations. 77. Spain appreciated the fact that Argentina was a party to all relevant human rights conventions of the United Nations as well as to those within the Inter-American system. Spain congratulated Argentina on upholding the principles of memory, truth and justice and recognized the high level of promotion and protection of human rights in Argentina. It made recommendations. 78. Sri Lanka noted that Argentina had recorded its highest-ever employment rate last year and pursued its endeavours toward strengthening social security and improving its health and medical sectors. Funding increases for education and national food-security plan initiatives are also noteworthy. Sri Lanka also reacted positively to the high percentage of Argentinian women holding a political office and welcomed efforts to combat human trafficking. It made recommendations. 79. Switzerland welcomed the increased number of Argentinian human rights judgements. It remained worried about the judicial system’s politicization and inefficiency; about widespread and indiscriminate preventive imprisonment and by detention conditions, where discrimination, arbitrary treatment, abuses and torture had been reported; and about official statistics’ manipulation. It welcomed the clarification of article 86 of the Criminal Code concerning abortion by the Supreme Court. It made recommendations. 80. Thailand welcomed Argentina’s progress in improving prison conditions, especially with respect to women detainees and asked whether it considered the “Bangkok rules” as part of their work. Thailand acknowledged continuing efforts in Argentina to promote and protect the rights of all vulnerable groups. Thailand appreciated that Argentina’s approach embraces establishment of the National Justice System Assistance Programme for Persons with Disabilities, following ratification of the CRPD. It made recommendations. 81. Trinidad and Tobago noted the Argentina measures to promote and protect human rights such as, inter alia, ratification of human rights-related instruments (ICCPR-OP2, CRPD and OP-ICESCR); enhanced cooperation with international human rights mechanisms, particularly with special procedures; improvements in housing; increased allocations for education, science and technology; advances in social security; and implementation of previous UPR recommendations. It made recommendations. 82. Tunisia recognized Argentina’s efforts towards the protection and promotion of human rights, in particular the strengthening of its legislative and regulatory framework, ratification of relevant international instruments and cooperation with international human rights mechanisms, including with Human Rights Council’s mandate holders. Tunisia took note of Argentina’s efforts to implement the recommendations of the first UPR cycle. It made recommendations. 83. The United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland welcomed new laws guaranteeing access for people with disabilities and migration law 25.871 and called for the Senate’s approval of the act on implementing a national mechanism under OP-CAT. Reports also suggest that violence against women continues to be a concern. Argentina’s efforts in this area, and in promoting human rights in general, would benefit from increased provision, and access to, information for civil society and the general public. It made recommendations. 84. The United States of America commended Argentina on advances in implementing accepted recommendations and adopting several laws. It welcomed the decriminalization of libel and slander in public-interest statements which served as a regional model. It was concerned by the polarized media environment and executive-branch interference.  While welcoming the bill for the prevention of torture, it expressed concern over reported torture and poor detention conditions. It encouraged inclusion of persons with disabilities in legislation. It made recommendations.  85. Uruguay highlighted Argentina’s cooperation with the human rights system; its commitment to combat impunity; and its commitment to ratifying international instruments on economic, social and cultural rights (OP-ICESCR). It noted the domestic workers bill, currently being considered in the Congress. Despite the National Plan on Sexual Health, Uruguay noted abortion as the main cause of maternal mortality. It made recommendations.  86. Uzbekistan hoped that the UPR mechanisms would help Argentina to solve problems concerning human rights and fundamental freedoms. It expressed serious concern about ongoing, widespread gender-based discrimination and the need to eradicate gender stereotypes from all curricula. The Committee opn the Elimination of Discrimination against Women has expressed its concern over unequal conditions of labour for women and persistent professional segregation. It made recommendations. 87. The Bolivarian Republic ofVenezuela welcomed the Patria Grande migration programme. Argentina ranks fourth worldwide and first on the continent for women’s representation. Venezuela commended the Law 285 on domestic violence. Last year’s record-high level of employment contributed to consolidating social policies with non-contributory pension universalization. Progress is being made towards universal health coverage providing full access to the entire population. It made recommendations. 88. Algeria noted Argentina’s commitment to implementing UPR recommendations and welcomed the establishment of the Argentinian bureau in support of victims of trafficking and its national institute to combat discrimination, xenophobia and racism. Algeria welcomed Argentina’s ratification of the International Convention on the Rights of Migrant Workers and Their Families and of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. Algeria made recommendations. 89. Angola commended Argentina’s commitment to the human rights machinery and to the ratification of international human rights instruments. It welcomed the legal reforms undertaken by the Government of Argentina, in the field of economic, social and cultural rights and its commitments towards gender equality.  It encouraged Argentina to continue to combat discrimination. 90. Armenia noted with appreciation all the substantial changes in Argentina’s national legal framework regarding access to justice for victims of crimes against humanity. Armenia welcomed Argentina’s creation of the National Institute to Combat Discrimination, Xenophobia and Racism and the measures taken by the Institute including on the issues of interculturality. Armenia made recommendations. 91. Australia welcomed the criminalization of enforced disappearances within Argentina’s Criminal Code, the passing of legislation protecting the rights of people with disabilities and efforts to combat discrimination. Australia expressed concern about media freedoms and attacks against journalists. It encouraged Argentina to improve detention conditions and formulate a national torture prevention mechanism, while noting concern about violence against women. It made recommendations. 92. Austria commended Argentina for its continued efforts to investigate, try and punish persons, who committed crimes against humanity during the military dictatorship. It expressed concern about continuing reports on inhuman conditions, torture or ill-treatment in various provincial prisons and detention centres and the reported high number of children living below the poverty line, in relation to which the Universal Child Allowance is a major step forward. It made recommendations. 93. Bangladesh appreciated the Government of Argentina’s strides toward diverse socio-economic development and implementing human rights recommendations and voluntary commitments. Bangladesh was particularly encouraged by favourable indicators in terms of education access and coverage, but recalled concerns raised by treaty bodies concerning discrimination against women, disparities in accessing socio-economic opportunities, particularly by migrants and asked about plans to address these concerns. 94. The delegation recalled that since 2003 there had been regulations on access to public information and that the current administration had established more guarantees than at any other time in the past, as was the case of decree 1172 guaranteeing access to public information to any citizen, under any condition. Additionally, there were five general regulations and the Executive power was required to ensure public information. As an example, the State had voluntarily declassified information related to crimes against humanity and serious violations of human rights. 95. Several delegations had referred to the existence of patterns of discrimination in Argentina that had to be overcome. The State acknowledged this situation and considered that such discrimination was not a problem coming from the victim but from society. Three elements were needed to improve the situation: information, visibility and political action. The delegation listened and gathered information and recommendations put forward by other delegations to develop public policies in order to improve the situation of people of African descent, Latin American migrants, indigenous peoples, transsexual persons and other groups and to combat gender violence. 96. The delegation acknowledged that the human rights movement was the best product generated by the Argentine social fabric during historically difficult moments. The movement was still relevant today. The national report prepared for the second  review of Argentina was a collection of all the cooperation of Argentine NGOs in the development, design and implementation of public policies and laws on human rights. 97. The delegation thanked delegations for the recommendations that were put forward in good faith in order to improve the human rights situation in Argentina as well as the best practices that other delegations shared during the review. 98. Before concluding, the delegation referred to the witness protection programmes for victims of State terrorism. Also, the delegation answered to some observations regarding freedom of expression in Argentina and considered that the best way to measure it was looking at how the media would report the results of the second UPR review of Argentina.  II. Conclusions and/or recommendations**  ** Conclusions and recommendations have not been edited. 99. The following recommendations will be examined by Argentina which will provide responses in due time, but no later than the 22nd session of the Human Rights Council in March 2013. 99.1. Ratify the new optional protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child (Portugal); 99.2. Accede to/ratify the 1961 Convention on the Reduction of Statelessness (Hungary, Portugal, Iraq); 99.3. Consider the possibility of ratifying the ILO Convention 189 (Uruguay); 99.4. Consider the possibility of ratifying the WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control (Uruguay); 99.5. Continue to strengthen laws and legislation which relate to human rights (Oman); 99.6. Conclude the process leading to the adoption of the bill which seeks to incorporate femicide in the Criminal Code (Peru); 99.7. Continue to improve its domestic framework for the empowerment of women (Singapore); 99.8. Transpose thoroughly and implement child legislation at the provincial level (Portugal); 99.9. Continue to ensure that the laws at the provincial and national levels are consistent with international human rights law standards, and are effectively implemented (South Africa); 99.10. Consider the request put forward by the Federal Council for Children, Adolescent and the Family to adjust the provincial procedural legislation for the establishment of non-custodial measures (Chile); 99.11.   Complete the process of establishment of an Ombudsman on the rights of girls, boys and adolescents (Honduras);   Continue to improve the legislative system of Argentina with a view to establishing the institution of the Ombudsman for children and adolescents (Russian Federation);   Appoint an Ombudsman for child and adolescent rights (Trinidad and Tobago). 99.12. Establish the national mechanism for the prevention of torture, in accordance with OP-CAT (Brazil); 99.13. Continue its efforts to promptly complete the legal procedures to establish a National Preventive Mechanism (Honduras); 99.14. Step up its efforts to complete the process of setting up the national mechanism for the prevention of torture and thus confirm its regional leadership in this respect (Tunisia); 99.15. Establish a national mechanism for implementation of OP-CAT, including through securing Senate approval in 2012 (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland); 99.16. Lobby for the passage of and implement legislation creating a national mechanism to prevent torture (United States of Americas); 99.17. Continue to implement programmes and measures intended to guarantee the right to health and the right to education (Cuba); 99.18. Continue efforts to provide attention to the most disadvantaged sectors (Cuba); 99.19. Renew its efforts to protect vulnerable groups, particularly persons with disabilities, women and children (Iraq); 99.20. Continue to intensify its efforts to achieve MDG 5 by the given deadline (Pakistan); 99.21. Continue the effective implementation of the initiative known as “Towards a National Plan to Combat Discrimination” (Armenia); 99.22. Continue to cooperate with the special procedures of the Human Rights Council in investigating cases of enforced and involuntary disappearances (Belarus); 99.23. Undertake an inclusive process with a wide range of civil society representatives when implementing the UPR recommendations (Norway); 99.24. Reinforce the institutional mechanisms and establish planning instruments for ensuring equality between women and men (Bulgaria); 99.25. Step up the efforts to combat discrimination against women at all levels (Republic of Moldova), including by reinforcing the institutional mechanisms and establishing planning instruments for ensuring equality (Indonesia); 99.26. Consider the possibility of making amendments to legislation aimed at strengthening equality for women and men, as well as consider the question of adopting legislation to ensure equality of rights and opportunities, including in the area of access to vocational training (Uzbekistan); 99.27. Define racial discrimination as an offence in domestic law in keeping with CERD’s observation in 2010 (Trinidad and Tobago) and implement the recommendation of CERD to step up efforts to recognize itself as a multi-ethnic State (South Africa); 99.28. Study the possibility of adopting new measures to strengthen the fight against discrimination, particularly with regards to persons of African descent (Tunisia); 99.29. Continue to implement measures to fill whatever protection gaps regarding persons of African-descent (Nicaragua); 99.30. Include Afro-Argentinians to reflect the historical memory of Afro-Argentinians (South Africa); 99.31. Continue its work to combat discrimination against vulnerable sectors and against all forms of discrimination, while encouraging the application of affirmative action policies for indigenous peoples and the migrant population (Bolivia(Plurinational State of)); 99.32. Continue its efforts to eradicate any form of discrimination against older persons (Brazil); 99.33. Strengthen human rights education and training programmes for the police and law enforcement forces, in particular those working in penitentiary establishments (Costa Rica); 99.34.     Investigate all allegations on the use of torture and cruel treatment in police detention places and prisons and ensure that the perpetrators be brought to justice (Belarus);   Ensure that all allegations of excessive use of force committed by the law enforcement personnel are thoroughly and impartially investigated, bringing alleged perpetrators to justice and providing appropriate remedies to victims (Slovakia);   Ensure that all allegations of torture and other forms of ill treatment be systematically subjected to in-depth and objective investigations and that the alleged perpetrators are brought to justice (Tunisia);   Ensure that all allegations of torture and other ill-treatment in detention are thoroughly and impartially investigated, and that alleged perpetrators are brought to justice (Austria).  99.35. Continue to improve conditions in the country’s prisons and detention facilities, especially in provincial detention facilities (Germany); 99.36. Continue with the improvement of conditions in all prisons and detention facilities to ensure compliance with international standards, including the United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners (Hungary); 99.37. Continue its efforts specifically with regard to over-crowding of prisons and prison violence (India); 99.38. Review the functioning of the penitentiary system in order to ensure that it complies with international standards, including through the prevention and punishment of torture and other cruel or inhuman treatment (Mexico); 99.39. Pursue its efforts to combat overcrowding in prisons (Morocco); 99.40. Improve conditions in prisons and detention centres to comply with international standards (Slovakia); 99.41. Improve prison conditions and adopt concrete measures to eliminate overcrowding in compliance with international standards (Slovenia); 99.42. Improve the penitentiary system conditions, combatting overcrowding and acts of prison violence, and promoting human rights training for penitentiary officers (Spain); 99.43. Continue its efforts to ensure a treatment of detainees that is in accordance with international norms and standards (Switzerland); 99.44. Continue its efforts towards improving prison conditions in the country (Algeria); 99.45. Improve conditions in all prisons and other detention facilities to ensure compliance with international standards, including the UN Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners and further effectively address the issue of prison overcrowding (Austria); 99.46. Design and implement policies for access to justice for victims of domestic violence, including free and extensive services providing legal and psychological support, as well as shelters (Costa Rica); 99.47. Implement effectively the legislation on violence against women to combat misogynous stereotypes, discrimination and violence whose victims are women (France); 99.48.   Enhance its efforts in order to better address the issue of domestic violence (Greece);   Pursue its efforts to give a response to the problem of domestic violence (Morocco). 99.49. Analyse the causes of the perceived impunity of perpetrators of violence against women and allocate funds and personnel to overcome these causes (Netherlands); 99.50. Develop further the united register for cases regarding domestic violence against women to create a full body of statistics regarding gender based violence throughout the entire country (Norway); 99.51. Take measures to ensure effective implementation of legislation to prevent and punish violence against women (Palestine); 99.52. Collect and disaggregate data on violence against women so as to ensure a better assessment about the implementation of applicable legislation (Palestine); 99.53. Establish or give a mandate to a Government body to collect and publish credible official data measuring all incidences of violence against women (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland); 99.54. Give priority to the formulation and implementation of the envisaged National Action Plan for the Prevention of Violence against women and the Punishment of Aggressors (Portugal); 99.55. Strengthen the actions and the commitment of all State bodies in combatting gender violence with the goal of reducing the number of deaths caused by such violence (Spain); 99.56. Accord gender-based violence high priority ensuring the development of policies to facilitate victims’ access to justice and a broad range of free services (Trinidad and Tobago); 99.57. Consolidate the fight against violence against women and against all forms of discrimination (Algeria); 99.58. Enforce effectively the legislation adopted to prevent and prosecute violence against women as well as the trafficking in women (Slovakia); 99.59. Continue to take steps to address domestic violence and human trafficking through education and awareness campaigns and services to victims, as well as ensuring the effective application of the law against perpetrators (Canada); 99.60. Continue to make progress on combatting violence against women and on the efforts to sanction and prevent human trafficking (Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)); 99.61. Devise and implement policies to facilitate access to justice and support for victims of violence against women, including human trafficking (Australia); 99.62. Enhance Law 26.364 on trafficking in persons, particularly on the basis of the recommendations of the Special Rapporteur on Trafficking in Persons (Belgium); 99.63. Step up efforts to combat trafficking in persons, including the implementation of the recommendations of the Special Rapporteur on Trafficking in Persons on the outcome of her visit in 2010; as well as make more severe the criminal liability related to the offense of trafficking in persons (Belarus); 99.64.   Strengthen its policies and institutional coordination to combat trafficking in persons in order to prevent and punish this international crime (Ecuador);   Enhance their efforts in combatting trafficking in persons (Indonesia);    Continue to strengthen efforts against trafficking in persons, provide information about it, and provide shelter for the trafficked victims (Libya)   Intensify its efforts in the implementation of the law on the trafficking in persons, especially that of children and women (Malaysia);    Take more effective measures to combat trafficking in persons (Republic of Moldova);   Continue its efforts in combating human trafficking, especially of women and children (Singapore).  99.65. Continue to strengthen its national coordination efforts and develop facilities and services to assist trafficked persons (Sri Lanka); 99.66. Prohibit by law all kinds of violence against children including corporal punishment in all settings (Bulgaria); 99.67. Increase the efforts to combat all forms of violence against children in all spheres (Republic of Moldova); 99.68. Provide the judicial system with solid logistical and administrative foundations in order to avoid delays, procedural impasses and the replacement of judges, particularly in on-going human rights trials (Switzerland); 99.69. Further strengthen its efforts on implementing the first cycle’s recommendation nº 4 on protection of witnesses and victims (Cyprus); 99.70. Guarantee the right to an effective defence in eviction proceedings, including for those who cannot afford a lawyer (Germany); 99.71. Further strengthen its efforts on implementing the first cycle’s recommendation nº 5 on preventing delays of the on-going human rights trials (Cyprus); 99.72. Continue developing a State policy based on the historical pillars of Argentina’s human rights movement: memory, truth and justice (Peru); 99.73. Continue the efforts to bring to justice perpetrators of crimes against humanity (Armenia); 99.74. Adopt the necessary measures to guarantee universal birth registration, with a particular emphasis on indigenous boy and girls (Mexico); 99.75. Continue to strengthen the measures to guarantee children access to free birth registration (Uruguay); 99.76. Pay more attention to measures to promote interreligious dialogue and prevent all forms of discrimination as well as to ensure that citizens can live in safety (Russian Federation); 99.77. Pass comprehensive legislation on access to public information and adopt a law covering the three branches of power (Belgium); 99.78. Implement legislative measures regarding access to information and establish mechanisms to facilitate public access in line with best practices (Canada); 99.79. Enact a new law governing access to public information in line with international standards (Switzerland); 99.80. Take steps to improve the access to public information through the establishment of an independent and autonomous body to guarantee timely and effective access in compliance with international standards (Norway); 99.81. Ensure that freedom of expression and freedom of the press are fully respected at all times (Germany); 99.82. Strengthen the actions to defend freedom of expression and the plurality of the media (Spain); 99.83. Respect and implement Supreme Court decisions on unresolved articles of the Media law (United States of America); 99.84. Undertake further measures to ensure the protection of journalists (Australia); 99.85. Continue strengthening the actions aimed at the eradication of poverty and the policies to guarantee equity in wealth distribution and access to the economic and social well-being for the entire population (Ecuador) 99.86. Disseminate its best practices to reduce poverty and combat social exclusion (Venezuela (Bolivarian republic of)); 99.87. Incorporate the social protection scheme, the “Universal Child Allowance” into law and extend it to cover children of marginalized groups including migrant workers and children of parents deprived of their liberty (Austria); 99.88. Adopt measures to ensure more effective implementation of the provisions of national labour legislation so as to eliminate the pay gap and to increase indicators for the hiring of women for jobs in non-traditional sectors (Uzbekistan); 99.89. Guarantee the full recognition of sexual and reproductive rights (France); 99.90. Implement appropriate measures with respect to the Argentine Supreme Court’s decision of 12 March 2012 regarding effective access for female rape victims to safe and legal abortions (Germany); 99.91. Ensure the right to abortion after rape throughout the country in accordance with the recent Federal Supreme Court verdict on this issue (Norway); 99.92. Introduce legal and other measures to reduce maternal mortality and morbidity stemming from unsafe abortions (Netherlands); 99.93. Strengthen efforts to reduce the maternal mortality rate, giving particular emphasis to reducing the number of deaths caused by unsafe abortions (Norway); 99.94. Further strengthen the policies and adopt measures for guaranteeing women the access to reproductive health products and services (Slovenia); 99.95. Ensure, as quickly as possible, the effective implementation of the Technical guide for the comprehensive treatment of non-punishable abortion at the national level so that access to legal abortion is guaranteed in practice (Switzerland); 99.96. Strengthen the use of existing legal and administrative provisions which guarantee sexual and reproductive health, with the goal of better protecting the rights of women, including the prevention of maternal mortality (Uruguay); 99.97. Continue attaching great importance to education and solve effectively the problem of children dropping out of school, so as to guarantee their right to education (China); 99.98. Continue strengthening its domestic measures with regard to persons with disabilities, in accordance with its international obligations under the CRPD (Malaysia); 99.99. Strengthen complementarity between governmental bodies so as to strengthen capacities of the institutions which deal with the needs of persons with disabilities (Oman); 99.100. Ensure that the new Civil and Commercial Code does not allow for deprivation of legal capacity of persons with disabilities (Slovakia); 99.101. Take the necessary measures to promote a greater inclusion of persons with disabilities in the areas of education and employment (Spain); 99.102. Ensure that persons with disabilities enjoy the right to access to justice, including simplified legal actions for reporting cases of discrimination as well as remedies when denied reasonable claims; and that persons with intellectual or psychosocial disabilities can act as witnesses in their own claims (Thailand); 99.103. Consider adopting specific legislation to ensure that children with disabilities are included in education as well as in health systems (Jordan); 99.104. Take further steps to ensure that children with disabilities be included in the development of the education system and in health insurance plans, as well as to take all necessary measures to ensure the implementation of legislation providing services for children with disabilities (Thailand); 99.105. Develop and promote programmes to provide access to jobs, education, transportation and public spaces, as well as protection from violence for persons with disabilities (United States of America); 99.106. Continue to develop the relevant programs to implement CRPD (Venezuela (Bolivarian republic of)); 99.107. Effectively implement the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and the Optional Protocol thereto (Armenia); 99.108. Continue systematically its efforts regarding the rights of indigenous peoples (Greece); 99.109. Continue the efforts aimed at stepping up participation and consultation with indigenous peoples on public policies that affect them (Peru); 99.110. Expedite the granting of communal land title to indigenous communities and consider appropriate compensation in this regard (South Africa); 99.111. Improve the situation of indigenous minorities, particularly regarding the right to property, access to housing, right to participation and intercultural education (Spain); 99.112. Strengthen the integration of indigenous peoples and immigrants, giving more rights to these categories (Oman); 99.113. Continue to ensure full respect for the human rights of migrants and their families, who find themselves in an extremely precarious socio-economic situation aggravated, inter alia, by a limitation of their citizenship rights (Bolivia (Plurinational State of)); 99.114. Ensure adoption of measures for social integration of refugees and asylum seekers that are fully in line with international standards (Belarus); 99.115. Revise the minimum required length of legal residence for migrants to access a disability or elderly pension and for their children to benefit from the program of universal child allowance (Mexico); 99.116. Adopt proactive measures to eliminate discriminatory stereotypes about migrant workers and their families, in political discourse as well as in the media, as recommended by the CMW (Pakistan); 99.117. Continue to make progress on measures against migrants’ discrimination (Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)); 99.118. Intensify its efforts to implement migration regulations (Armenia). 100. All conclusions and/or recommendations contained in the present report reflect the position of the submitting State(s) and/or the State under review. They should not be construed as endorsed by the Working Group as a whole. Annex [English only]   Composition of the delegation The delegation of Argentina was headed by Mr. Martin Fresneda, Secretary of Human Rights of Argentina, Ministry of Justice and Human Rights: • H.E. Alberto D’Alotto, Ambassador, Permanent Representative in Geneva; • Mr. Federico Villegas Beltran, Minister, Director General for Human Rights, Ministry of Foreign Affairs; • Ms. Andrea Gualde, National Director for Legal Affairs, Secretariat of Human Rights, Ministry of Justice and Human Rights; • Mr. Mariano Luongo, National Director of Management and Institutional Development of the Secretariat for Children, Adolescent and Family, Ministry of Social Development; • Mr. Victor Hortel, Director of the Federal Penitentiary Service; • Mr. Daniel Fernandez, President of the National Institute of Indigenous Affairs, Ministry of Social Affairs; • Mr. Raul Pelaez, Minister, Deputy Permanent Representative, Permanent Mission in Geneva; • Mr. Gonzalo Jordan, Secretary of Embassy, Permanent Mission in Geneva; • Ms. Valeria Drocco Rabaglia, Secretary of Embassy, Permanent Mission in Geneva; • Ms. Rosario Alvarez Garriga, Advisor of the Secretariat for Human Rights, Ministry of Justice and Human Rights; • Ms. Anabel Beatriz Alfonsin Cano, Advisor of the General Directorate for Human Rights, Ministry of Foreign Affairs.     