Distr.: General 6 July 2010 Original: English General Assembly Human Rights Council Fifteenth session Agenda item 6 Universal Periodic Review Report of the Working Group on the UniversalPeriodic Review* Armenia * Previously issued under document symbol A/HRC/WG.6/8./L.8.  The annex to the present report is circulated as received. Contents Paragraphs Page Introduction............................................................................................................. 1–4 3 I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process................................................ 5–92 3 A. Presentation by the State under review........................................................... 5–22 3 B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review........................ 23–92 6 II. Conclusions and/or recommendations..................................................................... 93–98 14  Annex Composition of the delegation ......................................................................................................... 22 Introduction 1. The Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review, established in accordance with Human Rights Council resolution 5/1, held its eighth session from 3 to 14 May 2010. The review of Armenia was held at the 8th meeting, on 6 May 2010. The delegation was headed by the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs, Arman Kirakossian. At its 12th meeting, held on 10 May 2010, the Working Group adopted the report on Armenia. 2. On 7 September 2009, the Human Rights Council selected the following group of rapporteurs (troika) to facilitate the review of Armenia: Slovakia, France and Bahrain. 3. In accordance with paragraph 15 of the annex to resolution 5/1, the following documents were issued for the review of Armenia: (a) A national report submitted/written presentation made in accordance with paragraph 15 (a) (A/HRC/WG.6/8/ARM/1); (b) A compilation prepared by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) in accordance with paragraph 15 (b) (A/HRC/WG.6/8/ARM/2); (c) A summary prepared by OHCHR in accordance with paragraph 15 (c) (A/HRC/WG.6/8/ARM/3).  4. A list of questions prepared in advance by Argentina, Azerbaijan, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Germany, Ireland, the Netherlands, Norway, Slovenia, Sweden, Switzerland and United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland was transmitted to Armenia through the troika. Those questions and written answers provided by Armenia are available on the extranet of the universal periodic review.  I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process A. Presentation by the State under review 5. In his introductory statement, the head of delegation indicated that the national report had been discussed in a round table with non-governmental organizations. Armenia had completed its reporting obligations towards United Nations treaty bodies, submitting all overdue reports at the end of 2009 and early in 2010, in the form of joint periodic reports. Since becoming a member of the United Nations in 1992, Armenia has actively cooperated with various United Nations bodies and agencies with the purpose of protecting and promoting human rights. In April 2006, Armenia extended a standing invitation to all special procedures.  6. Armenia has acceded to more than 50 human rights international treaties and has signed the International Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and the Optional Protocol thereto, the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance, and the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, which are currently in various stages of the ratification process. 7. The law on human rights defenders was adopted in 2003. In addition, the Ombudsman is recognized as the national preventive mechanism, pursuant to OPCAT. The amendment of the Constitution on 27 November 2005 had introduced substantial improvements in, inter alia, the provisions concerning fundamental rights and freedoms, thus making them more compliant with the requirements of international human rights covenants.  8. Efforts aimed at recognition of the Armenian genocide by the international community, not only to establish the supremacy of international law and justice, but also to prevent the recurrence of such crimes in the future by ruling out impunity, had been pursued by Armenia. In that regard, it had been active in the United Nations, initiating resolutions on the prevention of the crime of genocide. Most recently, in March 2008, the Human Rights Council had unanimously adopted the resolution entitled “Prevention of Genocide,” submitted by Armenia and co-sponsored by 62 countries. 9. Armenia regards the right of peoples to self-determination as a fundamental and indispensable human right and takes consistent steps towards its realization. Armenia is guided by the fact that the principle of the right of peoples to self-determination is currently a binding and universally recognized fundamental norm of international and national law for all States, without exception. Armenia is firmly committed to the exercise of the right of the people of Nagorny Karabakh to self-determination and assists, also as a result of its international obligations, in promoting all the fundamental rights of the people of Nagorny Karabakh in every possible way. The policy of economic blockade against Armenia and Nagorny Karabakh is a serious impediment to the full exercise of the right to development and many other rights, including, first and foremost, political, civil and socio-economic rights. 10. The Constitution provides for the right to life and also sets out the right to non-conviction to or no exercise of the death penalty. In 2003, Armenia ratified Protocol No. 6, on the Elimination of the Death Penalty, to the Council of Europe Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, and has signed Protocol No. 13. The death penalty has been removed from the new Criminal Code. Since its independence, Armenia has not carried out the death penalty. 11. Extensive legislative and institutional efforts have been made to eliminate torture and other cruel and degrading treatment or punishment. Armenia has ratified all United Nations and Council of Europe treaties related to the issue. The implemented legislative reforms have created substantial preconditions for the establishment of a system for independent monitoring of the places of custody. Despite the provisions set forth through legislative reforms, there are still issues requiring attention and additional improvement at the implementation level.  12. Freedom of thought, conscience and religion is enshrined in the Constitution. The law on “freedom of conscience and religious organizations” is the main law regulating the activities of religious organizations. The law on “alternative service” was adopted in 2003. During the years following its independence, Armenia took serious steps to ensure religious diversity in the country, and in 2009 there were 66 registered religious organizations. 13. The Constitution guarantees everyone’s right to freedom of expression. Freedom of the mass media and other means of mass information is also guaranteed. The Constitution guarantees the right to freedom of peaceful and unarmed assembly. Specific procedures for the exercise of the right to peaceful assembly are established in the law on “meetings, assemblies, rallies and demonstrations” (2004).  14. Ensuring increased access to and affordability of health-care services and continuous improvement in the quality of health-care services remain priorities of State policy. The right to education is fully guaranteed in Armenia for everyone, irrespective of ethnicity, race, sex, language, religion and political or other views. Basic general education is compulsory, and secondary education at State educational institutions is free of charge. There is an opportunity for free education at technical and vocational secondary educational institutions, as well as at higher levels.  15. In 2010 and 2011, Armenia will chair the United Nations Commission on the Status of Women. In February 2010, the Government approved the gender policy concept of Armenia, which was drafted with the direct participation of non-governmental organizations. The draft law on “ensuring equal rights and equal opportunities for men and women” is in the process of being formulated. 16. Combating the trafficking in human beings is recognized as one of the priorities of the Government of Armenia. In 2008, a national referral procedure for persons subjected to human trafficking was adopted. Currently, the formulation of the third national programme on combating human trafficking, for 2010-2012, is under way. In Armenia, non.governmental organizations play an invaluable role in combating the trafficking in human beings by, inter alia, providing support for the victims of trafficking. 17. Provisions condemning violence against women are included in the Criminal Code and the Family Code of Armenia. A draft law on domestic violence has been formulated and is currently being finalized for submission to the National Assembly. In March 2010, by the decision of the Prime Minister, an Inter-agency Commission on Combating Gender Violence was established.  18. Armenia has ratified the most important international instruments relating to children’s rights. A major legislative body exists in Armenia for the provision and protection of children’s rights. In 2003, the 2004-2015 National Plan on the Protection of the Rights of the Child was approved. In 2006, a three-tiered system was introduced at the national, regional and community levels with a view to ensuring the uniform and coordinated protection of the rights and interests of children.   19. A relevant legislative framework has been established in Armenia for ensuring all the rights and freedoms of the minorities living in its territory. Armenia actively cooperates with the Council of Europe on issues related to national minorities. The establishment of the Coordinating Council for National Minorities was an important step aimed at ensuring the protection of the national minorities, promoting their inter-community relations and improving the effectiveness of State efforts related to specific educational, cultural, legal and other issues.   20. The Armenian authorities also attach great importance to combating all forms of racial discrimination at both the national and international levels. Armenian legal reforms and practical measures are guided by the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action. In recent years, incitement to hatred towards Armenians and Armenia, as well as apparent war propaganda by Azerbaijan, has become a source of major concern. Manifestations of intolerance and the dissemination of xenophobia towards Armenians not only are gross violations of human rights, but also raise concerns with regard to ensuring peace, security and stability in the region. A number of well-known independent monitoring bodies expressed their deep concern about such behaviour. Armenia has repeatedly called upon the international community, particularly the Human Rights Council, to take measures aimed at halting and preventing such manifestations.  21. Armenia has taken all possible measures to ensure the protection of the human rights of persons seeking asylum and recognized as refugees in Armenia. Despite the efforts made for years to resolve the problems of more than 400,000 refugees exiled from Azerbaijan, Armenia has yet to fully resolve their housing problem. Continuous assistance from the international community would be indispensable in that regard.  22. Armenia will continue to cooperate with all international bodies and special procedures at both the regional and international levels, while also expanding its cooperation with the Human Rights Council, the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and the Special Adviser of the Secretary-General for the Prevention of Genocide.  B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review 23. During the interactive dialogue, 47 delegations made statements. A number of delegations expressed appreciation for Armenia’s national report and for the comprehensive presentation made by the delegation. A number of delegations also thanked Armenia for the written answers to their advance questions. Recommendations made during the dialogue are found in section II of the present report.  24. Azerbaijan inquired about measures to investigate the violations following the presidential elections and attacks against human rights defenders. Azerbaijan noted that the national report reflects incorrect remarks and referred to the letter of the President of the Council quoting that “The Human Rights Council, as a subsidiary body of the General Assembly, shall adhere to the official United Nations position as reflected in relevant General Assembly and Security Council resolutions. The Council therefore respects the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Azerbaijan within its internationally recognized borders”. Azerbaijan made recommendations. 25. Lebanon made reference to the brotherly relations that link Lebanese people to Armenian people. Lebanon noted that Armenia had acceded to more than 50 human rights treaties, cooperated closely with human rights bodies and included human rights principles in the Constitution and in laws. The delegation commended Armenia on efforts made to protect freedom of thought, conscience and religion, as well as opinion and expression; to improve access education and health; and to promote the rights of women and children. Lebanon made a recommendation.  26. Egypt commended the great attention paid to human rights education as well as the activities undertaken by the National Commission for the Protection of Children. It welcomed the adoption of the Concept Paper on Gender Equality for 2010-2014 and considered very important the development of a national referral mechanism for victims of trafficking.  Egypt made recommendations. 27. Algeria welcomed progress made in the field of health care and highlighted the significant reduction in child mortality rates in 2009. It also welcomed efforts aimed at, inter alia, combating poverty and ensuring decent living conditions for the population. It asked about the national human rights programme as well as programmes for combating the trafficking in persons. It made recommendations.  28. The Russian Federation stated that Armenia shared many centuries of close ties with it and commended progress achieved in implementing international commitments in the sphere of human rights, including accession to international human rights instruments, reforms of national legislation and the judicial and law enforcement systems, and work carried out to improve living standards and the quality of life. The Russian Federation made recommendations.  29. The Libyan Arab Jamahiriya asked whether there was a specific strategy concerning family allocations, pensions and improving care for persons with disabilities. It also asked how children were cared for, other than in orphanages or through foster care. Recalling that the national report indicated that primary education was compulsory except under certain circumstances provided for by law, the delegation asked what those circumstances were. It made recommendations. 30. The Holy See asked about Armenia’s experiences with the Human Rights Defender. It congratulated the country on a considerable reduction in infant mortality and noted improvements with regard to street children. It expressed concern about the high maternal mortality rate and asked about initiatives to combat human trafficking.  The Holy See made recommendations.  31. Cuba highlighted the priority placed on improving access to sanitation and quality health care and the resulting increases in the annual number of visits to outpatient clinics. It added that other indicators, such as child mortality, had also improved and that the primary school enrolment and literacy rates were both high. Cuba made a recommendation. 32. Turkey underlined that the Convention on Genocide clearly defines the act of genocide in legal terms, stating that this concept should only be utilized in its legal context. Otherwise, there was a risk of striking a blow at the supremacy of law, undermining the integrity of the Convention. On Nagorny Karabakh conflict, Turkey supported a peaceful resolution through negotiations between Armenia and Azerbaijan under the Minsk Group’s auspices.  Turkey stressed that attaining peaceful resolution of the conflict and ending occupation of Azerbaijani territories are essential requirements for setting the human rights record of Armenia straight. Turkey made a recommendation. 33. India stressed Armenia’s reforms in the health and education sectors and noted the measures taken to achieve gender equality. It appreciated the importance attached to the rights of national minorities and requested clarification as to whether the Human Rights Defender had a role and responsibilities like those of a national human rights institution. India did not make recommendations. 34. Spain expressed satisfaction at the possibility that Armenia might soon ratify, inter alia, the Optional Protocol to the Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and the Convention for the Protection for All Persons from Forced Disappearance. Spain congratulated Armenia on the decision to extend an open invitation to all special procedures and welcomed the abolition of the death penalty. It made recommendations. 35. The United States of America noted steps taken to improve Armenia’s human rights record.  While praising the June 2009 amnesty, which had resulted in the release of 30 individuals detained for political reasons, it expressed concern about a number of others still being detained. It looked forward to seeing independent media and welcomed the decriminalization of libel.  The United States made recommendations.  36. Indonesia commended Armenia for the national plan for improving the situation of women and the draft law ensuring equal rights and opportunities for men and women. However, it noted enduring patriarchal attitudes, discrimination and stereotypes concerning women’s role in society, and asked Armenia what measures had been taken to address that issue. It made a recommendation. 37. China noted laws and policies adopted to protect and promote human rights. It praised Armenia's outstanding records in the areas of health care and social welfare. It noted measures for women, children and persons with disabilities. It asked about measures taken to improve the situation of 3,500 to 4,000 refugee families lacking permanent shelter. China made a recommendation.  38. Mexico noted with appreciation Armenia’s commitment to international human rights instruments, as reflected by its ratification of international treaties and its cooperation with the special procedures of the Human Rights Council. Mexico made recommendations. 39. The Islamic Republic of Iran encouraged Armenia to intensify efforts to achieve the Millennium Development Goals. It took note of amendments to the Labor Code that, inter alia, guaranteed equal rights and prohibited forced labour. It also noted the adoption of a series of national plans and programmes to combat human trafficking, poverty and HIV/AIDS. Iran made recommendations. 40. Slovenia welcomed Armenia’s ratification of the Optional Protocol to CAT. However, it expressed concern about the designation of the National Preventive Mechanism, which had been carried out against the recommendations of local civil society and international experts. It was also concerned at the reports of torture and ill treatment in prison facilities and police stations. Slovenia made recommendations. 41. Ireland welcomed efforts to drop some of the most restrictive amendments to the law on meetings, rallies and demonstrations. It expressed concern at the fact that some legislative provisions placing restrictions on freedom of assembly remained. Ireland also noted a lack of comprehensive legal provisions prohibiting discrimination against women. It welcomed the strengthening of the judiciary and domestic legislation prohibiting torture, but expressed concern about allegations of physical and psychological pressure exerted by police during arrests and interrogations. Ireland made recommendations. 42. The Netherlands commended Armenia for being a party to the majority of the core human rights instruments and for having extended a standing invitation to United Nations special procedures. It was concerned about Armenia’s broadcasting laws which had reportedly failed to ensure political and ideological pluralism, as well as a law that restricted freedom of assembly. The Netherlands made recommendations. 43. Sweden took note of existing legislation to guarantee freedom of speech and expressed concern about restrictions on broadcasting permits and the harassment and arbitrary detention of journalists. It raised concern about reports concerning the impartiality of the judiciary, including the widespread violation of fair-trial standards during the events that had taken place in March, and asked about policy initiatives to address those issues. Sweden made recommendations. 44. Argentina commended Armenia for achievements in terms of human rights education. It also welcomed the National Plan of Action for the Protection of Children’s Rights (2004-2015) and the Strategic Plan to Eradicate Poverty (2004-2015). Argentina made recommendations.  45. Italy noted achievements, including the abolition of the death penalty in 2003, the accession to the majority of the core human right instruments, the establishment of the Office of the Human Rights Defender in 2004 and the issuance of a standing invitation to United Nations special procedures in 2006.  It also stressed the accession of Armenia to the Council of Europe, the inclusion into the European Neighborhood Policy and the establishing of an EU-Armenian Human Rights dialogue. Italy made recommendations. 46. Austria noted that stereotypes about women and their social role still persisted and that women had unequal access to general and reproductive health services, particularly in rural areas. Austria welcomed the National Plan of Action for the Protection of Children’s Rights, but indicated that the enjoyment by vulnerable children of their rights remained limited. Austria asked about measures to address the situation of internally displaced persons. It made recommendations. 47. Uruguay emphasized the leadership role played by Armenia in the resolution on the prevention of genocide submitted at the seventh session of the Human Rights Council. Uruguay welcomed the launching of negotiations to improve the critical situation between Armenia and its neighbours. Uruguay made recommendations. 48. Kyrgyzstan noted that Armenia was a party to more than 50 international human rights instruments and expressed appreciation for the laws adopted on lawyers and the bar. It noted that the educational system played an important role and highlighted the fact that reproductive health issues were included in school curriculums. Kyrgyzstan made recommendations.  49. Brazil highlighted the establishment of the Office of the Human Rights Defender, reductions in infant mortality and the standing invitation issued to special procedures. Brazil expressed concern about allegations of restrictions on the press, the excessive use of force against peaceful demonstrators and obstacles to freedom of religion. Brazil asked what specific measures were being taken to address violence against women, and about the effects of the financial and economic crisis on Armenia’s policies. Brazil made recommendations. 50. The Czech Republic thanked Armenia for its national report and its answers to advance questions. It welcomed the work carried out in the area of children’s rights. It referred to issues related to the definition of torture, places of detention, human rights education, fair trial, domestic violence and juvenile justice. The Czech Republic made recommendations. 51. Germany asked about measures to prevent trafficking, especially the trafficking in women and children; specific programmes for victims; and efforts to strengthen regional cooperation to combat this phenomenon. Germany made recommendations. 52. France noted the recommendations made by the OSCE Office of Democratic Institutions and Human Rights with regard to the forthcoming general and presidential elections in Armenia. It asked whether Armenia would ratify the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.  France made recommendations.  53. Greece welcomed the signature by Armenia of the CRPD and its Optional Protocol, the CED and the OP-ICESCR. Greece expressed support for Armenia’s efforts to eliminate incidents of torture and inhuman and degrading treatment, while much work remained to be done. Greece noted the adoption of the Concept Paper on Gender Equality as an important step towards improving the status of women in the country. Greece made recommendations. 54. Kazakhstan commended Armenia for having ratified a number of international human rights instruments and extended a standing invitation to the special procedures of the Human Rights Council. It asked about the challenges faced by the Ombudsman and requested further information about the problems of street children. Kazakhstan made recommendations. 55. Canada welcomed Armenia’s efforts to strengthen its institutional and legislative framework for human rights and its standing invitation to all special procedures. Canada encouraged Armenia to investigate reports that the country continued to be a place of origin for people trafficked for the purposes of sexual exploitation and forced labour. It made recommendations.   56. Cyprus was pleased to note that Armenia had signed the Rome Statute of the ICC and the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide. It recognized that national, ethnical, racial or religious groups that have suffered the horrors of such deplorable acts have increased responsibility in raising awareness. It encouraged Armenia to continue its efforts aimed at increased participation of national minorities in the educational and cultural life of the country. Cyprus made recommendations.  57. Belarus noted that the existence of a legal framework, specialized institutions and the National Plan for Human Rights attested to Armenia’s political will to adhere to its international human rights commitments. Belarus expressed appreciation for efforts to promote the rights of national minorities in the country. It made recommendations. 58. Bosnia and Herzegovina commended Armenia for its efforts in various areas related to human rights. It noted that the role of civil society in the preparation of the national report, as well as whether it had participated actively after the drafting of the report, remained unclear, and requested further information about future plans for cooperation with civil society. Bosnia and Herzegovina made recommendations.  59. Iraq commended Armenia’s efforts to promote and protect human rights through the establishment of relevant national human rights institutions, its accession to international treaties and the issuance of a standing invitation to special procedures of the Human Rights Council. It made a recommendation. 60. The United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland welcomed Armenia’s efforts to promote human rights, including gender equality. It called for an independent investigation into the deaths connected to the events following the 2008 elections. It was also interested in hearing what steps were being taken to address human trafficking. The United Kingdom made recommendations.  61. Hungary noted with satisfaction the abolition of the death penalty, the establishment of the Ombudsman and the standing invitation issued to all United Nations special procedures. It referred to serious delays in submitting overdue reports to treaty bodies and concerns about, inter alia, violence against children and the trafficking of girls. Hungary emphasized the importance of ensuring genuine safeguards for the independence of the judiciary. It made recommendations. 62. Finland noted that much needed to be done to ensure the implementation of the existing legislation. It also indicated that the aftermath of the 2008 presidential elections had revealed shortfalls in the implementation of Armenia’s international human rights obligations. Finland made recommendations. 63. Norway commended Armenia for its commitment to working with the United Nations human rights system and welcomed the work undertaken by the Office of the Ombudsman. It was concerned about reports of harassment of the opposition. It asked about measures to follow up on the request of the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women that the safety of women in political life be ensured and that their participation in public life be encouraged.  Norway made recommendations. 64. Djibouti acknowledged the willingness of the Armenia authorities to cooperate with the mechanisms of the Human Rights Council in order to improve the human rights situation in the country. Djibouti congratulated Armenia on its commitment to guaranteeing a decent life for all citizens. It made recommendations.  65. Kuwait acknowledged efforts made by Armenia related to the national action plan for human rights. It also appreciated the important role played by women in Armenia, as well as their contribution to the creation of equal opportunity for men and women. Kuwait made recommendations.  66. Switzerland welcomed the integration of human rights education into school curriculums. It added that, since the arrest and ill treatment of opposition members following the 2008 elections, the actions of the opposition appeared to have been suppressed and police violence tolerated. Gender-based violence in the family was reportedly widespread. Switzerland made recommendations. 67. Romania congratulated Armenia on progress in adapting its legislation to meet international human rights standards and on its good cooperation with the special procedures.  It also applauded the efforts to improve the status of women and asked for information about the drafting of the law on gender equality and the intention to create a mechanism for the promotion of women.  Romania made recommendations.  68. Poland commended Armenia on the establishment of the Office of the Human Rights Defender and welcomed the adoption of a series of national plans and programmes. It noted concerns expressed by the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women about the growth in human trafficking and by the Committee on the Rights of the Child about the conditions faced by refugee children and children living in orphanages. Poland made recommendations.  69. The Lao People’s Democratic Republic welcomed Armenia’s cooperation with United Nations agencies to promote and protect human rights, including the issuance of a standing invitation to all special procedures. It made a recommendation. 70. Ukraine commended Armenia for its efforts to protect and promote human rights and reforms carried out in the country. It inquired about the measures to implement the recommendations of the Council of Europe concerning, inter alia, further reform of the justice system and enforcement bodies.  It shared concerns raised by civil society about domestic violence against women. Ukraine made recommendations. 71. In responding to questions, the delegation noted that the Armenian special investigative service had conducted an inquiry into the excessive use of force against civilians and that two criminal cases had been brought against four police officers in connection with the 2008 March events on the basis of video materials obtained from independent expert groups and the ad-hoc parliamentary commission, as well as video materials received from private individuals. The police officers had been found guilty by the court and sentenced accordingly. 72. Concerning the allegations of the incommunicado detention of persons arrested by the police, Armenia clarified that there had been no such cases. 73. Five criminal cases were investigated on alleged police beatings and ill or cruel treatment. Proper investigations had been undertaken and none of the alleged facts of ill-treatment were proven. Moreover, all complaints and witness testimonies had been withdrawn.  74. Those detained in connection with the March 2008 events were not being detained for political reasons, but rather for specific offences, including the illegal storage of weapons and ammunition. Several of the individuals claiming that they had been detained for political reasons, had been convicted before the March 2008 events for crimes such as involvement in prostitution, illegal procurement of weapons and high treason. 75. The independence of judges was guaranteed by the Constitution of Armenia and provided for by legislation. Guarantees for the functioning of judges and members of the Constitutional Court, as well as grounds and procedures for holding them liable, were defined in the Constitution and in law. 76. Judges and members of the Constitutional Court may not be detained or involved in cases as defendants, and no legal proceedings on imposing administrative liability on them may be instituted, without the consent of the Council of Justice or the Constitutional Court, respectively. Judges and members of the Constitutional Court may not be arrested, except in cases in which the arrest had been made during or immediately after the commission of the criminal offence. In such cases, the President of the Republic of Armenia, as well as the President of the Court of Cassation or the President of the Constitutional Court, respectively, shall be promptly informed of the arrest. 77. Self-governance of the judiciary shall be implemented through self-government bodies established by the Judicial Code of Armenia, which was aimed at regulating all factors guaranteeing the independence of the judiciary, including the appointment and retirement of judges. The Council of Justice was entrusted with disciplinary responsibility with regard to judges and other important issues. 78. The training of judges was an ongoing process carried out in cooperation with various international organizations, including the United Nations, the Council of Europe, the European Union and OSCE. Ongoing training was provided for them regarding juvenile justice, the European Convention on Human Rights and other important legal issues, with a view to enhancing their professional capacities.   79. The Criminal Code needed to be amended to include the definition of torture, in accordance with international treaties. The amendment process was underway.  80. Significant work had been undertaken in the area of gender discrimination in the recent past. There was no differentiation with respect to gender in the application of human rights and fundamental freedoms in Armenia. In that regard, Armenia referred to constitutional provisions prohibiting discrimination on the basis of sex, as well as to legal acts, including the Criminal Code. A draft law had been formulated on equal rights and equal opportunities for men and women, which prohibited all forms of discrimination. Furthermore, the draft law contained a definition of gender-based discrimination and all other legal terms stipulated in different international agreements. 81. Concerning the monitoring of penitentiary institutions, public monitoring groups carrying out the monitoring of penitentiary establishments under the supervision of the Ministry of Justice, and of holding facilities under the police, had been functioning.  The groups were composed of representatives of non-governmental organizations authorized to have unimpeded access to police holding facilities and penitentiary institutions. 82. The police were taking measures to implement the recommendations of the parliamentary inquiry into the March 2008 events. A decree had been adopted on the use of special measures by the police and the police forces in 2009. Several measures had been included in the police reform programme adopted in 2010 in an effort to establish a legislative basis for ensuring public order and safety. It included training for police officers on the use of physical force and special measures for cases of unrest, as well as on work with journalists.  In 2008 and 2009, Armenia had organized seminars and workshops involving the mass media and police under an initiative of the Council of Europe. In addition, special instructions governing the relationship between police and journalists had been developed.  83. Armenia had taken measures to ensure training for police officers concerning public demonstrations and the use of police equipment. Internal investigations into the allegations of physical abuse and/or psychological pressure by police had been conducted. Accordingly, in 2008, 16 police officers had been disciplined for the ill treatment of detainees, and some of them had been dismissed from the police force. Awareness-raising campaigns, including hotlines, had been conducted with a view to improved communication between the general population and the police.  84. In order to ensure equal opportunities for persons with disabilities, Armenia was implementing a programme of inclusive education and training. There were also State employment compensation programmes for those who were uncompetitive in the labour market. In addition, the State provided support and subsidies to those registered as persons with disabilities who wished to set up their own enterprises. Armenia would soon establish special training centres for persons with disabilities. The Government initiated amendments in the employment legislation foreseeing work practice for those unemployed and persons with disabilities that had professional but no service record. It was also looking into improving working conditions as well as incentives for those who would employ them. According to the same draft amendments, the landowners in rural areas would receive special subsidies for vocational education. 85. The Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs operated eight children’s homes, seven boarding schools, and there were two centres for children in difficult situations. There was a foster care system financed by the State budget, and civil society organizations were working on such foster care with State support. A pension reform had been worked out that would enable pensioners to afford basic necessities.  86. Labour law prohibited any labour contract from being concluded with children under 14 years of age.  Employment contracts for children under 14 to 16 years of age shall be concluded with the consent of a parental guardian. Such children could be employed only if it was not to the detriment of their health, education or morals. The Labour Code included special provisions prohibiting children from working in hazardous and health-threatening situations.  87. Armenia had carried out wide-ranging reforms with respect to special schools for children. There were 49 inclusive schools in the country, 45 of which received State funding for inclusive education programmes. Armenia had organized teacher training and had created a general educational curriculum for national minorities, which provided 43 lessons in native language and on literature. Yezidi experts were included in the National Institute of Education, which addressed education issues concerning the Yezidi and other national minorities. Various teacher training programmes on the Yezidi language had been organized by the National Institute of Education, and courses about Yezidi culture and history had been included in its programmes.  88. With the support of UNHCR, Armenia was building houses for refugees and adopting measures to meet their basic housing needs. The housing programme dealt with most vulnerable category of refugees and was being implemented through the issuance of certificates for all refugees who would buy flats. Armenia was looking further into the housing needs of those refugees living with relatives or renting flats. There were 1,500 families living in such circumstances.  89. Armenia’s foremost concern regarding internally displaced persons was to ensure their safe return to their former places of residence, which required the peaceful settlement of conflict. At present, such individuals could return to their former places of residence, where there was only a minimum risk of armed conflict.   90. The Government reform in the area of reproductive health, implemented in 2008 and 2009, had increased the State budget and funds for reproductive services for the entire population. As a result, every woman in Armenia now had the right to gain access to reproductive health services free of charge. With the assistance of the World Bank, the Government had implemented primary health-care programmes and health-care modernization programmes, through which Armenia had created the capacity necessary to ensure primary health-care services of good quality, including reproductive health-care services, in more than 130 rural and remote communities. The Government had continued the modernization of rural health-care centres, the training of staff, the establishment of mobile health-care groups and the reform of emergency health-care services, in order to provide health care in rural and remote areas. In 2008, the Government had decided to conduct in Armenian Schools a special training programme entitled “Healthy Behaviour”, which included issues related to reproductive health and HIV/AIDS.  91. Armenia had created a manual for law-enforcement officials on the trafficking in human beings, as a result of which educational programmes would be included in all training curriculums for law-enforcement officials, including the police, the judiciary and the prosecutor’s office. Armenia had also created a school curriculum for students in the higher grades, which would be implemented starting in September 2010. No children had been trafficked outside Armenia, and there had been only a handful of cases of child trafficking and beggary within the country. Extensive cooperation with non-governmental organizations was being carried out, including shelters run by the non-governmental organization community.  92. Armenia would examine all recommendations and implement them.  II. Conclusions and/or recommendations 93. The following recommendations formulated during the interactive dialogue/listed below enjoy the support of Armenia which considers that they are already implemented or in the process of implementation: 93.1. Sign and ratify the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, aimed at abolishing the death penalty (Spain, France, Argentina, Iraq, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland); 93.2 Ratify the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance (Azerbaijan, Argentina, Uruguay) as soon as possible (Greece); 93.3. Consider expediting the ratification of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (Brazil); finalize the ratification of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (Algeria); ratify the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and the Optional Protocol thereto (Argentina, Iraq, Kyrgyzstan); ratify the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and the Optional Protocol thereto as soon as possible (Greece); ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (Azerbaijan); 93.4. Work effectively in order to bring all laws into line with the revised Constitution (Finland); 93.5. Review the definition of  torture in its national legislation so that it fully complies with that set out in article 1 of the Convention against Torture and other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (Czech Republic); adopt a definition of torture fully in compliance with article 1 of the Convention against Torture and other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (Ireland); adopt a definition of torture in line with article 1 of the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (Uruguay); 93.6. Provide a legislative basis for the OPCAT National Preventive Mechanism, and ensure the institutionalized participation of civil society (Slovenia); 93.7. Strengthen the work of the institute of public defence by providing free legal aid to the population (Kyrgyzstan); 93.8. Accelerate the process aimed at creating a national human rights institution in accordance with the Paris Principles (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya); 93.9. In line with Human Rights Council resolution 9/12, consider elaborating a national human rights programme and plan of action to strengthen the capacity of the State to promote and protect human rights (Brazil); complete within the envisaged time the comprehensive national programme on human rights protection (Egypt); implement the comprehensive national programme on human rights protection efficiently and within the envisaged time (Bosnia and Herzegovina); continue to promote human rights cooperation based on its actual conditions (China); continue to improve the human rights situation in the country, in the light of the improvements made so far (Italy); 93.10. Continue to carry out reforms in the country in order to fully ensure the protection of human rights and the rule of law in accordance with all relevant laws and codes, as stated in its national report (Lao People’s Democratic Republic); 93.11. Further its activities aimed at gender mainstreaming in Government policies (Egypt); adopt a gender-specific approach in Armenia’s policies and programmes (Greece); 93.12. Carry on its work to implement a national programme for sustainable development that would contribute to the further improvement of the human rights situation in the country (Russian Federation); 93.13. Expand the prorgramme to prevent the spread of HIV/AIDS, in particular in remote areas (Kyrgyzstan); continue its efforts to promote public knowledge about HIV/AIDS, particularly among young people (Islamic Republic of Iran); 93.14. Continue to work to protect the rights of the child (Kyrgyzstan); 93.15. Continue its efforts to address discrepancies in the enjoyment of rights by vulnerable groups, including children with disabilities, refugee children and children living in rural areas (Islamic Republic of Iran); 93.16. Urgently submit the overdue reports to treaty bodies (Hungary); carry out the submission of its pending report to the Human Rights Committee as soon as possible (Spain); submit its overdue report under ICCPR (Austria); 93.17. Increase efforts to end discrimination against women and provide adequate access to health-care services for all women (Austria); 93.18. Make every possible effort, both at home and at the international level, to raise awareness about the issue of genocide and to combat impunity, with the aim of preventing the recurrence of any acts of genocide (Cyprus); 93.19. Take additional measures for the elimination of cruel and inhuman treatment through the training of law-enforcement officers (Bosnia and Herzegovina); 93.20. Ensure the proper and thorough investigation of torture cases in prison facilities and at police stations (Slovenia); ensure that all allegations of torture and inhuman or degrading treatment are investigated promptly and that perpetrators are brought to justice (Greece); 93.21. Follow up the implementation of national machinery for the advancement of women and addressing violence against women (Islamic Republic of Iran); continue efforts aimed at combating domestic violence (Kyrgyzstan); consider devoting priority attention to the elimination of all forms of violence against women, in particular domestic violence, by establishing comprehensive measures, including specific legislation (Brazil); take additional measures to eliminate the phenomenon of domestic violence against women (Ukraine); ensure that the authorities and police services put in place appropriate measures to eradicate domestic violence, beginning with the adoption and implementation of the draft law on domestic violence to which the Armenian delegation referred (Switzerland); 93.22. Initiate awareness-raising campaigns in schools to further promote the rights of women (Romania); 93.23. Take immediate steps to make domestic violence – including psychological abuse; beatings; rape, including marital rape; and sexual assault -- a criminal offence (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland); 93.24. Continue its efforts with regard to the trafficking in human beings, through the elaboration of the third national action plan for 2010-2012, and take further steps to improve assistance to the victims of trafficking (Bosnia and Herzegovina); reinforce measures aimed at punishing and preventing the trafficking in persons and supporting victims (Argentina); fulfil its intention to develop and adopt a national programme for 2010-2013 to counter the trafficking in persons, and actively cooperate in the international arena on that issue (Belarus); actively pursue efforts to prevent trafficking, including through information campaigns for the general public, including children, aimed at promoting awareness of the dangers associated with all forms of trafficking and to ensure protection and assistance for the victims of trafficking, with full respect for their human rights (Germany); strengthen research on the occurrence of child trafficking and regional cooperation with countries to which Armenian children are trafficked (Poland); build on its existing legal framework by devoting additional resources to providing assistance to victims of trafficking (Canada); establish special services and reintegration programmes for victims of trafficking (Poland); 93.25. Intensify efforts to prevent and combat violence against children, including corporal punishment (Brazil); adopt specific legislation punishing violence against children, including the prohibition of corporal punishment; move forward in taking the measures necessary for the registration of the highest possible number of births; support educational policies aimed at enabling girls to continue their education and eliminating stereotypes regarding gender roles; initiate awareness-raising programmes, particularly in rural areas, in order to change the tendency to value child labour more than education, and encourage access for minority children to education in their mother tongue (Uruguay); 93.26. Ensure that allegations of the ill treatment of persons detained by the security/police forces are investigated and that perpetrators are held accountable (Canada); investigate cases of police abuse to prevent impunity and put an end to ill treatment by police (Azerbaijan); ensure a system for registering the complaints of victims of torture or ill treatment, in particular persons in detention or military conscripts (Czech Republic); 93.27. Implement the recommendations of the OSCE/ODIHR trial monitoring report, and provide for an independent and credible investigation into the 10 deaths following the events of 1 March 2008 (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland); intensify efforts to present the cases in court in order to clarify, provide for reparations and punish those responsible (Spain); follow up on the recommendations set out in the March 2010 report of the OSCE Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights regarding shortcomings in Armenia’s justice system (Netherlands); 93.28. Implement the recommendations of the ad hoc committee mandated by the National Assembly, and conduct an independent and transparent investigation into the excessive use of force leading to the punishment of those responsible (Switzerland); 93.29. Complete the reforms of the justice system and ensure the compliance of domestic legislation with the revised Constitution and the new legislation on the judiciary (Poland); 93.30. Take the measures necessary for the in-service training of the judges regarding judicial improvements on issues of human rights (Turkey); set up training programmes on human rights for police officers (Italy); strengthen human rights education provided to the police, prison staff and the military (Czech Republic); 93.31. Take measures to combat corruption (Azerbaijan); 93.32. Strengthen fair-trial safeguards, including the non-admissibility before the court of any evidence obtained through torture or ill treatment (Czech Republic); 93.33. Continue its efforts to bring its penitentiaries and detention centres into compliance with international human rights standards (Canada); ensure in practice regular access to all places of detention, including police stations (Czech Republic); 93.34. Carry out further activities aimed at supporting the rehabilitation and reintegration of remand prisoners and convicts by organizing professional training for them (Bosnia and Herzegovina); 93.35. Take the legislative and administrative measures necessary to fully guarantee freedom of religion in the country, in particular to prevent any form of discrimination or undue obstacles in the registration of associations of religious minorities (Mexico); fully ensure freedom of religion for all, without discrimination (Azerbaijan); 93.36. Ensure the implementation of the judgment of the European Court on Human Rights that found the Government’s denial of a license to A1 broadcasting company to be in violation of Armenia’s human rights obligations (Netherlands); 93.37. Take measures to ensure free and fair elections in the future (Sweden); implement recommendations issued by the Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights of OSCE to improve the holding of the next general elections, in 2011, and the presidential elections in 2012 (France); 93.38. Pursue the policy aimed at improving the position and participation of women in public life, and promote programmes for the protection of the rights of children (Algeria); consider further measures to improve and encourage women’s participation in society, and ensure that such measures include benchmarks with timetables or increased quotas and that their implementation is closely monitored (Norway); 93.39. Ensure the effective implementation of the minimum employment age set out in the Labour Code and of provisions prohibiting heavy and hazardous work for children (Holy See); 93.40. Take measures to eradicate poverty (Azerbaijan); 93.41. Continue its efforts in these fields to improve access to education and health and to promote the rights of women and children (Lebanon); 93.42. Continue to implement programmes aimed at guaranteeing quality education and health services to its population, at all levels (Cuba); 93.43. Continue to enhance and expand access to and the affordability of health-care services, with a specific emphasis on rural and remote areas, as well as most vulnerable groups (Egypt); guarantee access to health care for vulnerable social groups and populations in rural and remote zones (Algeria); improve the quality of primary health care, especially in rural areas (Kuwait); continue efforts to improve access to health care for all, particularly those in the most vulnerable categories, persons with disabilities and rural populations (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya); 93.44. Continue its efforts to reduce maternal and infant mortality, saving mother and child (Holy See); 93.45. Continue to support children’s homes (Kyrgyzstan); 93.46. Establish effective mechanisms to address the problems faced by street children (Kazakhstan); 93.47. Ensure that children belonging to all minority groups have equal access to education (Austria); adopt measures to ensure access for minority groups, especially children, to education in their mother tongue (Azerbaijan); 93.48. Continue to promote human rights education in school curriculums at all levels (Djibouti); 93.49. Ensure the integration of human rights into all school curriculums, and train law enforcement officers in human rights (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya); 93.50. Continue to hold awareness-raising campaigns within Armenian society about the rights of national minorities, with the aim of further enhancing tolerance and non-discrimination in all spheres of public life (Cyprus); 93.51. Continue the consistent and successful policy aimed at ensuring the rights of all national minorities residing in the country, as well as support for their social, educational, informational and cultural needs (Belarus); 93.52. Take adequate measures to better protect the fundamental rights of migrant workers and refugees living in Armenia (Djibouti). 94. The recommendations listed below have been examined by Armenia and enjoy its support: 94.1. Suggest that the Government proceed with ratifying the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court(Cyprus); accelerate the ratification of the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court (Romania); consider expediting the ratification of the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court (Brazil); ratify the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court (Austria, Greece, Uruguay); ratify the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court, signed on 1 October 1999, to implement it in national law (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland); 94.2. Introduce changes to laws on drugs, given the increase in drug use in the country (Kyrgyzstan); 94.3. Intensify efforts aimed at the adoption of the draft law “on ensuring equal rights and equal opportunities for men and women” (Brazil); ensure that the draft law “on ensuring equal rights and equal opportunities for men and women” is finalized in accordance with international protection standards and that it is adopted as soon as possible (Greece); continue its efforts to enact laws in the area of equality of opportunity and rights for men and women (Kuwait); 94.4. Further strengthen the capacities of the Office of the Human Rights Defender and enhance its cooperation with civil society (Greece); Further strengthen the capacities of the Office of the Human Rights Defender and enhance its cooperation with civil society in order to enable better protection of human rights in Armenia (Egypt); strengthen the role of the Human Rights Defender institution to allow the Defender to increase his monitoring and expand his work to the regions (Finland); establish a special section with sufficient powers and resources within the Ombudsperson’s office, or task a deputy with addressing child issues exclusively (Hungary); provide the Office of the Human Rights Defender with the human and financial resources necessary to complete its tasks as a national preventive mechanism, and strengthen the guarantees against the ill treatment of imprisoned persons so that all those in the police force will receive a strong message emphasizing that ill treatment is illegal  (Switzerland); 94.5. Create an inter-ministerial mechanism to accord due attention to the recommendations of international mechanisms, including those emanating from the universal periodic review, with the participation of civil society (Mexico); establish an effective and inclusive process with independent non.governmental organizations to follow up on the universal periodic review recommendations (Norway); 94.6. Submit its periodic reports to the relevant treaty bodies and make responses to the letters of allegations and urgent appeals as well as to questionnaires on thematic issues in due course (Ukraine); 94.7. Invite the Special Rapporteur on the independence of judges and lawyers (Hungary, Germany); consider extending an invitation to the Special Rapporteur on the independence of judges and lawyers (Uruguay); 94.8. Ensure that the visit by the Working Group on Arbitrary Detention, which has been agreed upon in principle, is also given priority and that it takes place in the near future (Norway); 94.9. Establish measures in order to provide for equality of rights and opportunities between women and men and the elimination of discrimination against women, including through legal reforms; and devote priority attention to effectively eliminating all forms of violence against women, especially domestic violence, inter alia, by establishing a national mechanism for the advancement of women, and to addressing the issue of violence against women (Uruguay); take measures to eliminate discrimination against women, especially domestic violence (Azerbaijan); 94.10. Continue to ensure equal rights for women in society (Belarus); 94.11. Adopt legislation and measures to prevent violence against women and children, including through the strengthening of its monitoring mechanism (Indonesia); 94.12. Strengthen measures to ensure an effective fight against domestic violence; in particular, introduce the crime of domestic violence into its criminal code as a matter of priority and ensure that effective support and protection is available for victims of domestic violence (Czech Republic); 94.13. Intensify measures to address factors driving women and girls into prostitution (Poland); 94.14. Continue efforts to prevent and combat the sexual exploitation of children (Brazil); 94.15. Ensure the swift, transparent and effective prosecution of violence against journalists (United States of America); effectively investigate the cases concerning attacks against journalists, opposition members and human rights defenders (Azerbaijan); ensure that crimes and violations against human rights defenders, journalists and members of the opposition are effectively investigated and prosecuted, and that those responsible are brought to justice (Norway); 94.16. Undertake effective measures to ensure the independence of the judiciary (Italy); ensure the full independence of the judiciary (Azerbaijan); strengthen measures to ensure the full independence of the judiciary (Uruguay); 94.17. Push forward further reforms that will guarantee in practice the separation of powers and, in particular, the independence of the judiciary, including through the training of judges (Greece); make additional efforts to strengthen the judicial system, carrying out its reform and the training of judges (Bosnia and Herzegovina); 94.18. Make efforts to ensure the implementation of legislative provisions on the impartiality and transparency of the judicial system, including by allocating sufficient funding (Sweden); 94.19. Strengthen efforts to establish a system of juvenile justice in compliance with international standards, and take specific measures to protect the rights of children and persons in detention or in prison (Czech Republic); 94.20. Put in place measures to ensure full respect for the right to freedom of opinion and expression, and create a more amenable climate for investigative journalism (Canada); take all measures necessary to ensure full respect for freedom of expression, including freedom of the press, ensuring that no persons are deprived of their liberty solely for having exercised their freedom of expression, their right to peaceful assembly or their right to take part in the Government of their country (Sweden); ensure that civil society activists and journalists are able to carry out their work free from harassment or violence (United States of America); 94.21. Ensure a fair and transparent process for issuing broadcasting licences and guaranteeing the independence of broadcasting regulatory bodies (Norway); take the measures necessary to bolster the independence of the National Audiovisual Commission as a regulatory body for the media (France); amend its broadcasting laws so as to ensure the real independence of the regulatory body for television and radio (Netherlands); 94.22. Establish a transparent process for the digitalization process to ensure space on the airwaves for independent and small regional media outlets (United States of America); 94.23. Ensure that, if the amended law decriminalizing libel is adopted, it is implemented in a way that protects freedom of expression (United States of America); 94.24. In line with the Government’s commitment to protecting fundamental freedoms of its citizens, review its legislation and practices in order to guarantee the free exercise of the right to assembly and freedom of expression, without any limitations other than those permitted by international law (Mexico); fully respect and promote freedom of expression (Azerbaijan); guarantee freedom of expression and assembly for all political parties, media and human rights defenders (Switzerland); 94.25. Take concrete steps to meet obligations with regard to creating an environment that fosters freedom of expression, including respect for the independence of civil society organizations and the right to assemble (Norway); 94.26. Ensure, in its laws and regulations as well as in practice, that no arbitrary impediments are imposed with respect to exercising the right to freedom of assembly (Netherlands); ensure respect for the right to freedom of assembly, in line with its international obligations (Azerbaijan); respect – in law and in practice – the right of individuals to assemble peacefully (United States of America); implement the Law on Meetings, Rallies and Demonstrations in a transparent and proportional manner (Ireland); 94.27. Ensure the right to work of persons with disabilities, and establish effective mechanisms and strong legislative regulations to protect their economic, social and cultural rights (Kazakhstan). 95. The following recommendations will be examined by Armenia, which will provide responses in due course, but no later than the fifteenth session of the Human Rights Council, in September 2010: 95.1. Consider ratifying the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families (Algeria); 95.2. Include in Armenia’s legislation an explicit and comprehensive definition of discrimination against women, and improve legal provisions prohibiting discrimination against women (Austria); elaborate a specific definition of discrimination against women in Armenia’s legislation (Ireland); define and prohibit in Armenian legislation, in an explicit and comprehensive manner, discrimination against women and gender-based violence, and adopt social awareness measures (Argentina); 95.3. End politically motivated prosecutions of individuals it deems opposition, and take steps to strengthen the rule of law, including respecting minimum guarantees as laid out in the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, equal protection of the law, and judicial independence (United States of America); 95.4. Waive the moratorium on granting licenses to radio and television broadcasters and the 2008 amendments to the Law on Television and Radio of 2000, and carry out legislative measures safeguarding the independence of the National Commission on Television and Radio and the Council on Radio and Public Television (Spain); 95.5. Guarantee freedom of peaceful assembly, and amend Article 9.4.3 of the Law on Meetings, Assemblies, Rallies and Demonstrations (Spain). 96. The recommendation below did not enjoy the support of Armenia: 96.1. Take measures to eliminate discrimination against Yezidis (Azerbaijan). 97. Armenia offered the following comment: Recommendation 96.1 cannot be accepted as it is inaccurate and does not correspond to the actual situation. There is no discrimination against any national minority residing in Armenia, including the Yezidis. 98. All conclusions and/or recommendations set out in the present report reflect the positions of the submitting State(s) and/or the State under review. They should not be construed as endorsed by the Working Group as a whole. Annex Composition of the delegation The delegation of Armenia was headed by the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Arman Kirakossian, and was composed of the following members: • Mr. Charles Aznavour, Permanent Representative of Armenia to the United Nations Office at Geneva;  • Ms. 	Dziunik Aghajanian, Head of the International Organizations Department, Ministry of Foreign Affairs; • Ms. Satenik Abgarian, Deputy Permanent Representative, Minister Plenipotentiary, Permanent Mission of Armenia to the United Nations Office at Geneva; • Mr. Levon Sayan, Counsellor, Permanent Mission of Armenia to the United Nations Office at Geneva;  • Mr. Vahe Demirchyan, Director, International Legal Relations Department, Ministry of Justice; • Ms. Narine Balayan, Adviser to the Minister of Labour and Social Affairs ; • Mr. Suren Krmoyan, Legal Adviser to the Minister of Health; • Mr. Armen Ghukasyan, Deputy Chief of Staff of the Police; • Ms. Aida Tigranyan, Assistant to the Minister of Education and Sciences; • Mr. Petros Aghababyan, Head of the Asylum Division, State Migration Services, Ministry of Territorial Administration; • Mr. Aram Amirzadyan, Chief Prosecutor, Department for Cases being Investigated in the Security Services of the Republic of Armenia, Office of the General Prosecutor; • Mr. Vaheh Gevorgyan, First Secretary, Permanent Mission of Armenia to the United Nations Office at Geneva. 