  United Nations  A/HRC/21/6    General Assembly  Distr.: General 6 July 2012  Original: English  Human Rights Council Twenty-first session Agenda item 6 Universal Periodic Review   Report of the Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review*  * The annex to the present report is circulated as received.   Bahrain Contents  Paragraphs Page   Introduction .............................................................................................................  1–4 3  I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process ................................................  5–114 3   A. Presentation by the State under review ...........................................................  5–25 3   B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review ........................  26–114 6  II. Conclusions and/or recommendations .....................................................................  115–116 15  Annex   Composition of the delegation .........................................................................................................  27 Introduction 1. The Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review (UPR), established in accordance with Human Rights Council resolution 5/1 of 18 June 2007, held its thirteenth session from 21 May to 4 June 2012. The review of Bahrain was held at the 1st meeting on 21 May 2012. The delegation of Bahrain was headed by Salah Bin Ali Mohamed Abdulrahman, Minister of State for Human Rights. At its 10th meeting held on 25 May 2012, the Working Group adopted the report on Bahrain 2. On 3 May 2012, the Human Rights Council selected the following group of rapporteurs (troika) to facilitate the review of Bahrain: Uruguay, Saudi Arabia and Spain. 3. In accordance with paragraph 15 of the annex to resolution 5/1 and paragraph 5 of the annex to Human Rights Council resolution 16/21 of 25 March 2011, the following documents were issued for the review of Bahrain:  (a) A national report submitted/written presentation made in accordance with paragraph 15 (a) (A/HRC/WG.6/13/BHR/1);   (b) A compilation prepared by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) in accordance with paragraph 15 (b) (A/HRC/WG.6/13/BHR/2);  (c) A summary prepared by (OHCHR) in accordance with paragraph 15 (c) (A/HRC/WG.6/13/BHR/3).  4. A list of questions prepared in advance by Denmark, Germany, Ireland, Liechtenstein, Netherlands, Norway, Slovenia, Sweden and United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland was transmitted to Bahrain through the troika. These questions are available on the extranet of the UPR.  I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process  A. Presentation by the State under review 5. The head of delegation expressed Bahrain’s appreciation to the Council and to the international organizations of the United Nations for the support provided to the kingdom. He especially thanked OHCHR for the programme resulting from the universal periodic review (UPR) over the past four years, which contributed effectively to enhancing the capacity of the concerned authorities regarding the implementation of commitments and recommendations of the UPR, and hoped that this fruitful cooperation and support would continue in the future. 6. Bahrain recalled that it was the first member State to undergo the Human Rights Council review in 2008. Having 565 non-governmental organizations (NGOs), as of early 2012, Bahrain initiated the review for its second report, including its achievements, with the partnership of all concerned entities, including governmental and non-governmental organizations, as well as civil society actors. 7. The delegation stated that the past four years had been full of events and developments. Much has been documented with regard to the advancement of human rights at various levels, and the kingdom does not claim to be perfect nor free from obstacles that hinder the implementation of the recommendations and commitments. However, with determination and the will to accomplish honest work, Bahrain will overcome these constraints. 8. Major achievements were reviewed over the past four years, starting with education. Bahrain pays full attention to this sector, is committed to providing educational and cultural services to its citizens as a right that is prescribed in its Constitution and Education Law. The Education for All (EFA) Global Monitoring Report for 2011 indicated that Bahrain is among the high-performance States for achieving the EFA's goals. 9. The delegation reported on the National Strategic Plan for Human Rights Education, which was reviewed based on the commitment in 2008, and a plan was developed to foster a human rights culture. A special subject on human rights has been included in the citizenship course for all classes at different levels of education. 10. The delegation stated that the Constitution of Bahrain provided for the right of all citizens to enjoy equal health standards without discrimination. In support of that right, the Ministry of Health has prepared development programmes and plans in collaboration with the World Health Organization. The Government bears the full cost of treatment whenever it is inaccessible locally. 11. The delegation stated that women in Bahrain have assumed leading positions, and proactive steps have been taken to involve them in activities alongside men. Women in Bahrain are being empowered to be further involved in decision-making, leadership and ministerial positions, as well as in the private sector, civil society institutions and political associations. The establishment of the Supreme Council for Women is a milestone in the empowerment process of women. The Council is in the process of studying the removal or amendment of reservations to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, so as to be consistent with national legislation and laws, while preserving the sovereignty of the State. 12. In respect of nationality, the delegation mentioned the discussions currently underway on proposed amendments to the Nationality Law, in order to grant Bahraini nationality to children of Bahraini women who are married to foreign husbands, in conformity with the regulations and constructive standards preserving their rights. 13. In the same context, the delegation reported on the gains of women, such as Law No. 35 of 2009, which was promulgated to treat non-Bahraini wives of Bahraini husbands in the same manner as Bahraini citizens, with regard to fees for Government-provided services. 14. The delegation stated that the Supreme Council for Women had played an effective role in the promulgation of the provisions of the Family Law, of which part one pertains to the Sunni school section implemented as part of Bahrain's obligations under the 2008 UPR. Efforts are underway to expedite the promulgation of the second part of the Family Law pertaining to the Ja’afari school section as an urgent and significant need requested by the community. 15. The head of delegation pointed out that the Government is striving to finalize the adoption of two laws that are still under discussion by the legislative authority, namely, the Child Protection Law and the Law on the Protection of Victims of Family Violence. 16. With regard to workers, the delegation stated that Bahrain has issued a series of new laws. The Ministry of Labour, in collaboration with the relevant authorities conducts periodical inspections of workers’ accommodations and their work places in order to ensure the adequacy of health and safety conditions. In addition, a special office has been established to receive and investigate workers’ complaints, and take necessary action to redress the situation or retrieve the worker’s rights. The new revised Labour Law which is expected to be adopted very soon also includes a special chapter regulating issues pertaining to domestic workers. 17. The delegation stated that a general strategy has been adopted to upgrade the security apparatus and personnel. Work is underway to revise applicable security procedures in order to ensure maximum human rights. Furthermore, Bahrain has retained international experts on security and human rights to ensure professional policing, with assurances from the Interior Ministry to apply all of the recommendations of the Bahrain Independent Commission of Inquiry. 18. Regarding the events in Bahrain during the months of February and March 2011, the delegation stated that they had prompted Bahrain to realize significant human rights reforms and achievements in favour of its citizens. The delegation also stated that the King had initiated a number of drastic, but gradual, steps aimed at restoring the situation to normal in the aftermath of the events, beginning with the conducting a National Consensus Dialogue including various components of Bahraini society. The dialogue enabled a complete review of a series of important local issues, and resulted in a number of demands for reform in political, social, economic and human rights areas, the most important being the adoption of a number of constitutional amendments and modifications of a number of bills. 19. The delegation provided information on the Bahrain Independent Commission of Inquiry (BICI), established by a Royal order, which had formulated a number of recommendations; all have been accepted by the Government. A National Commission, chaired by the President of the National Assembly, was also formed to follow up the implementation of BICI's recommendations, in collaboration with governmental and non-governmental bodies. A large number of BICI's recommendations has been fully implemented, and others are currently being implemented. 20. On the issue of accountability, the delegation stated that a number of officials who had committed violations during the unrest events of 2011 have been referred for accountability. In the meantime, 142 ongoing investigations have resulted in nine prosecutions so far. A special investigation unit was established in the Public Prosecution Office to consider and investigate reports and complaints of alleged torture, cruel and inhuman treatment. The unit is supported by highly qualified human rights investigators, forensic and criminology experts. The unit operates in compliance with international standards, in particular the Istanbul Protocol. 21. The delegation recalled that the trials relating to the 2011 events have been conducted before civil courts in compliance with international standards. Each prosecuted person has been allowed access to a lawyer. It stated that a lawyer is usually appointed for each person accused in a criminal case who does not have his/her own lawyer. The court provides the accused person with all guarantees to enable him/her to defend himself/herself. All court trials are held in public. 22. The delegation explained that charges related to the right to freedom of expression and opinion have been dropped, as well as the confessions related to those charges. Procedures have also been adopted for cases against medical personnel, so that more than 1,185 out of 1,416 cases referred from the national safety courts have been dropped. The Supreme Judiciary Council had adopted a resolution to establish a judicial committee to review all conviction verdicts issued by the national safety courts; the committee has ordered the release of a number of convicted persons, and the rest of the verdicts are currently being reviewed by the fully independent judicial authority. 23. The delegation stated that the King had call for the establishment of an Arab Human Rights Court to deal with all human rights-related cases. The King’s call came from his firm belief in the political leadership of such a court, given the successive changes and events the Arab world was witnessing. Bahrain has also established a Special Compensation Fund for victims and relatives of victims affected by the recent incidents. 24. The Government has recently endorsed, in principle, and taken constitutional and legal action with a view to ratifying the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance. The Government of Bahrain also intends to finalize a bill pertaining to the creation of a national human rights institution (NHRI), as a fully independent mechanism, in compliance with the Paris Principles. The relevant bodies have been instructed to take the necessary legal and constitutional action to refer the bill to the legislative authority; both chambers of the legislature have endorsed a number of crucial constitutional amendments approved by the King on 3 May 2012. 25. The delegation stated that the Government had considered the constitutional amendments resulting from the views gathered during the National Consensus Dialogue. It has since rearranged the relationship between the executive and the legislative authorities, giving full supervisory powers to the Council of Representatives over the Shura (Consultative) Council, so that the role of the later has been reduced and more balance has been created between the two councils.  B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review 26. During the interactive dialogue, 66 delegations made statements. Recommendations made during the dialogue can be found in section II of the present report. 27. Slovenia commended Bahrain for acceding to the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and regretted that despite the recommendations made during the first review in 2008, reservations to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women have not been removed and the Optional Protocol has not been ratified. Slovenia made recommendations. 28. Spain enquired about the number of persons still detained or who have been subjected to sentences as a result of protests, the number of detainees who have been moved from special to ordinary courts, and the re-admission process for persons who have been dismissed. Spain made recommendations. 29. Sudan supported the Bahrain’s efforts and the positive approach adopted since its first UPR. Sudan reiterated that the UPR should not be a forum to put States on trial. Sudan made recommendations. 30. Sweden appreciated the establishment of the BICI. It noted the report on, inter alia, investigations concerning the excessive use of force against protestors and detainees who had been subjected to torture. It also noted recent restrictions on civil society organizations. Sweden made recommendations. 31. Switzerland was concerned about the detention of persons exercising their right to freedom of expression and the violation of human rights by the security officials during peaceful demonstrations. It was also concerned by the treatment of human rights defenders. Switzerland made recommendations. 32. Thailand was pleased about the ratification of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and welcomed the visits by OHCHR. It encouraged stronger promotion and protection of the rights of migrant workers. It urged all segments of society to participate in the reform and reconciliation process. It made a recommendation. 33. Turkey commended the reforms made so far with regard to security, the judiciary, the media and education in line with the BICI report.  It mentioned, inter alia, the reform towards transformation to a complete civilian legal order, institutionalization of an independent Ombudsman’s office and the establishment of an independent body to review complaints by victims about allegations of torture. Turkey made a recommendation. 34. The United Arab Emirates commended Bahrain on its efforts to establish the BICI, its cooperation with the different human rights treaty bodies, and the amendments made to the Constitution and to criminal legislation. It commended Bahrain for establishing a system governed by democracy and rule of law. The United Arab Emirates made recommendations. 35. The United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland welcomed promises to implement reforms based on BICI’s recommendations. The United Kingdom was deeply concerned by reports of human rights violations that continue to occur. It counted on the authorities to ensure that convictions in military courts are reviewed and that prisoners detained for exercising their right to freedom of expression are released. It made recommendations. 36. The United States of America commended the establishment of the BICI, but was concerned that several of the Commission’s most important recommendations had not been implemented. It remained concerned by the failure of the State to effectively investigate and prosecute alleged human rights abusers, and by the ongoing prosecution of 20 medical professionals and Abdulhadi Al-Khawaja. It made recommendations. 37. Uruguay hoped that BICI’s recommendations would be implemented and monitored. It also shared concerns expressed by the High Commissioner regarding the human rights situation in relation to the 2011 events and acknowledged Bahrain’s commitment to ratify international instruments. Uruguay made recommendations. 38. Uzbekistan noted with satisfaction the implementation of nine recommendations and 37 voluntary commitments from the first UPR cycle, especially regarding the rights and freedom of women and children. Uzbekistan requested clarifications regarding the affirmation of NGOs that there has been no progress on the prohibition of corporal punishment for children, and additional information on the measures adopted to prohibit all forms of corporal punishment. 39. Yemen commended Bahrain’s commitment to the implementation of the recommendations from the first UPR. The report and the contributions of civil society in the current cycle reflect the collective efforts of the Government to protect and promote human rights. Yemen enquired about the initiatives regarding education opportunities for those concerned. Yemen made one recommendation. 40. Algeria commended Bahrain’s commitment to the recommendations from the first UPR. It welcomed Bahrain’s intention to withdraw its reservation to article 9, paragraph 2, of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women. Algeria is satisfied with Bahrain’s reasoning not to lift its reservations to article 15, paragraph 4 of the same Convention since it has no relevance, given that freedom of movement is a right governed by the Constitution. Algeria made recommendations. 41. Argentina welcomed the delegation and paid tribute to Bahrain for the creation and implementation of the National Plan of Action related to its commitments under the UPR. It made recommendations. 42. Australia acknowledged Bahrain’s efforts to address reported human rights violations during and following the 2011 unrest, and welcomed the setting up of the BICI and the national Commission to this effect. Australia remained concerned by reports of human rights violations against peaceful protestors, and would like to see prisoners have access to lawyers and trial before civilian courts. Australia made recommendations. 43. Austria commended the appointment of the BICI to investigate human rights violations during the 2011 unrest, and encouraged Bahrain to present the Commission’s findings to the Human Rights Council. Austria remained particularly concerned about allegations of torture, arbitrary detention as well as the harassment of journalists. Austria made recommendations. 44. Azerbaijan commended the measures taken to combat human trafficking and commended the Government for establishing a unit to combat trafficking in persons in the Ministry of Interior. It also commended Bahrain’s cooperation with United Nations human rights mechanisms. Azerbaijan noted the measures taken by Bahrain to improve housing conditions for workers. It made recommendations. 45. The head of the delegation clarified that all of BICI’s recommendations had been accepted, that a special committee had been formed to implement such recommendations, and that the Minister of Justice has been tasked with following up the implementations.  Additionally, some of the recommendations require some legislative amendments. The head of the delegation reiterated that no one has been detained for exercising their right to  freedom of expression and opinion. In additional, all charges related to the exercise of the right to freedom of expression and opinion had been dropped, and those persons currently being prosecuted had committed criminal offences. The Government could not interfere in the independence of the judiciary. 46. The delegation stated that the Government had not used excessive force, but rather proportionate and necessary force to restore the situation to normal, similar to what other nations do to control similar situations. 47. The delegation stated that the Child Law is currently at the final stage of the legislation process. It clarified several issues related to the integration of persons with disabilities in Government schools and recalled that Bahrain had ratified the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. The Government has developing a strategy to fully integrate persons with disabilities into the society. It stated that the Ministry of Education accommodates all pupils and students, boys and girls, with disabilities or having special needs, and provided them with equal opportunities to participate in school and university. 48. The delegation explained that the Reform and Rehabilitation Law currently with the legislative authority included a number of provisions concerning human rights standards and international agreements. 49. The delegation stated that the Ministry of Education has introduced a special curriculum for national education, which includes human rights. Based on Bahrain’s commitment further to the 2008 review, a strategic plan was developed to educate students on human rights. The curriculum also includes the rights enshrined in the human rights treaties. 50. The head of the delegation stated that there were 2,339 places of worship for Muslims.  Another 12 have been built or are under construction and the construction of 20 more is being studied. 51. The delegation expressed thanks to the expat community for its cooperation in the economic development of the country 52. Concerning female domestic workers, the delegation stated that Bahrain had enacted a law to protect the rights of this category of workers. The law should be officially adopted in the near future and covers the rights of seven categories of women workers. 53. The delegation stated that once Bahrain had ratified the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, it had also made amendments to national legislation accordingly, as long as they were not contrary to Islamic law. A National Committee was formed to follow up the implementation of the national model to integrate women’s needs into the Government's programme. The Supreme Council for Women ensured broad dissemination of the contents of the Convention and conducted training for judges, so as to ensure that they apply the Convention in their work. The Council has also set up a group to monitor the implementation of the recommendations related to the Convention. The Supreme Council for Women has developed a National Strategy for the Advancement of Bahraini Women. 54. The delegation stated that according to statistics, women’s representation had increased in decision-making positions in the three authorities. The Supreme Council for Women conducted the first national conference for Bahraini women in November 2010 to monitor the national efforts on integrating women’s needs and the gender dimension. 55. The delegation stated that Bahrain plans to revise its legislation relating to family law, to include restrictions and controls on the marriage of young girls, unless permission is obtained from the judiciary, and verification of the husband's reconciliation and compatibility in relation to Islamic law. 56. The delegation stated that discussions were underway on a proposed amendment of the Nationality Law in conformity with regulations and constructive standards to preserve the right to Bahraini nationality for the children of Bahraini women married to non-Bahraini men, that was not in contradiction to the sovereignty of the State. Also some temporary measures have been taken to give women equal rights with respect to granting Bahraini nationality to their children. 57. With regard to trafficking, the delegation referred to the Trafficking Law of 2008, which prohibits all forms of trafficking in persons and imposes imprisonment penalties commensurate with the crime. 58. The delegation commended the efforts of Princess Sabeeka bint Ibrahim Al Khalifa, wife of the King of Bahrain, in the fight against trafficking in persons. It stated that Bahrain was in the process of creating an award for companies and institutions interested in combatting trafficking in persons. 59. Qatar commended Bahrain’s efforts to promote and protect human rights by the recent constitutional amendments aimed at enhancing participation and empowering reforms and the democratic approach. Qatar appreciated the consultations and cooperation sought in the preparation of its national report. Qatar made recommendations. 60. Belarus recognized Bahrain’s commitment to implementing the recommendations from the previous UPR and appreciated the steps taken by the Government to develop its legislation. Belarus commended the progress made with regard to civil and political rights and in reducing maternal and child mortality rates. It acknowledged Bahrain’s efforts to combat human trafficking. Belarus made recommendations. 61. Belgium noted with satisfaction Bahrain’s establishment of the BICI following the 2011 demonstrations. Belgium was well aware of the ongoing challenge of the manipulation of Shi’ite movements. It was concerned about the occurrence of new human rights incidents occurring this year. Belgium made recommendations. 62. Brazil noted the establishment of the BICI and urged the Government to honour commitments made towards implementing BICI’s recommendations. It highlighted the goals set to reduce poverty and social inequality, including offering opportunities to the Shia community. Brazil made recommendations. 63. Canada requested information on the processes established, methods used and results achieved with respect to human rights sensitivity training for police officers and security forces. It recalled the commitments in 2008 to increase training on human rights for police officers. Canada encouraged Bahrain to implement all the recommendations presented in the BICI report. Canada made recommendations. 64. Chile welcomed Bahrain’s efforts to integrate women’s needs into the development process; the establishment of the Supreme Council of Women and the participation of women in the last election. It also welcomed the child protection bill and the draft law aimed at reducing restrictions on freedom of expression. Chile made recommendations. 65. China appreciated Bahrain’s constructive participation in the review process and noted the series of measures taken by Bahrain to implement the recommendations from the first round of the UPR. China commended Bahrain’s attention to the rights and interests of groups, such as women, children and disabled persons. It welcomed Bahrain’s endeavors to improve its capacity in the area of human rights. China made a recommendation. 66. Costa Rica indicated that the signing of a memorandum of understanding with the International Committee of the Red Cross to visit prisoners would contribute to the prevention of torture. It expressed concern with impunity, trials of civilians in military courts and allegations of abuse and torture. It made recommendations. 67. Cuba noted policies adopted through a plan of action for 2010–2014, including guidelines in support of initiatives to empower women. Cuba highlighted the adoption of a family code and noted the enactment of Law No. 19/2009 concerning the family. Cuba made a recommendation. 68. The Czech Republic welcomed efforts to launch the national reconciliation process, in particular the establishment of the BICI. It expressed concern over the authorities’ excessive use of force and the harassment of human rights activists, medical personnel and journalists. It also expressed concern about torture and ill-treatment of protestors. It made recommendations. 69. Denmark commended Bahrain on the establishment of the BICI but regretted that only a small number of recommendations have been implemented so far. Denmark highlighted the case of Danish citizen, Abdulhadi Al-Khawaja, who, according to the Commission’s report, has been subject to torture and ill-treatment along with other detainees. Denmark made recommendations. 70. Ecuador acknowledged Bahrain’s efforts with respect to the protection of migrant workers, praising in particular the draft labour law, which includes a section on domestic workers and the setting up of a hotline to facilitate the filing of complaints. Ecuador made recommendations. 71. Egypt commended Bahrain’s efforts in the preparation of the national report and the establishment of the BICI, in addition to its commitment to implement BICI’s recommendations as well as the establishment of a Committee for this purpose. It supported all the national efforts undertaken to tackle human rights challenges. Egypt commended Bahrain for its efforts in combatting discrimination against women and reforming the labour law to ensure equality. Egypt made recommendations. 72. Estonia remained concerned about crackdowns on the protest movement and the prevalence of impunity, restrictive measures in the Press Law and the Penal Code, and that women were subject to discrimination, in law and in practice. Estonia made recommendations. 73. Finland referred to the findings in the BICI report, indicating human rights violations committed by the State security forces since the unrest in February 2011. Finland enquired about the steps taken to ensure a prompt and impartial investigation of alleged human rights violations and to ensure that those responsible are brought to justice. Finland made recommendations. 74. France condemned the arrests and prosecution of human rights defenders and trade unionists. It also deplored that fact that clashes between police forces and protesters had caused the death of some 30 persons since the BICI report (chaired by Mahmoud Cherif Bassiouni) had been issued. France made recommendations. 75. Germany commended Bahrain for reconfirming that the BICI report was the basis for the way forward; however, it regrets that its overall implementation remains insufficient. Germany urged Bahrain to fully, promptly and wholeheartedly implement all of BICI’s recommendations. It has continuously expressed concern about the ongoing violence, human rights violations and the lack of a thorough, political approach in order to solve the crises. Germany made recommendations. 76. Hungary welcomed the establishment of the national commission to oversee and coordinate the implementation of BICI’s recommendations, and hoped to see progress on the follow-up. However, it expressed concern about reported ill-treatment of protesters, among them human rights defenders. Hungary made recommendations. 77. India welcomed the national model for integrating women’s needs in relation to development and the temporary measures taken to grant citizenship to children of Bahraini women married to foreigners. It referred to specific initiatives relating to foreign workers. It urged Bahrain to accelerate implementation of BICI’s recommendations. India made recommendations. 78. Indonesia welcomed the establishment of a national human rights institution. It also appreciated the initiatives undertaken in the area of gender equality. Indonesia appreciated Bahrain’s legislation which guarantees the protection of the rights of migrant workers. Indonesia made a recommendation. 79. The delegation clarified that there were no restrictions on journalists. It stated that over the past year, 397 journalists had entered Bahrain and arrangements had been made for such visits; but some journalists had violated the kingdom’s immigration law. It added that the Press Law was in the final stage, and that it included a provision prohibiting imprisonment of journalists. 80. The delegation mentioned the memorandum of understanding signed with the International Committee of the Red Cross to visit detention centres. 81. The delegation reported on the enhancement of the role of the community police service, which had been developed and expanded by opening up employment to all the components of the community without discrimination. Training is being provided for all ranks as part of the 2012-2013 training programme, in collaboration with international legal and human rights organizations. 82. Concerning allegations of torture, the delegation stated that a special unit, established by a decision of the Public Prosecutor in the Office of the Prosecutor General, was investigating all allegations. It stated that all citizens had the right to put forward any evidence or witnesses to the Prosecutor General’s Office; some allegations have been investigated and those found responsible have been held accountable. A total of 142 complaints had been received; the public prosecution heard 120 complainants and 85 persons have been referred to the forensic doctor. A number of officers and personnel were also referred to the courts including nine alleged cases ranging from beatings to death, torture and failure to report known crimes. Investigations are still underway. 83. Iran (Islamic Republic of) drew attention on the compilation prepared by OHCHR, in which concerns had been expressed over the deterioration of the human rights situation in Bahrain. It mentioned sections of the report where the High Commissioner expressed alarm at the excessive use of force and urged Bahrain to undertake investigations into the allegations of torture as well as to put an end to impunity. Iran made recommendations. 84. Ireland remained concerned about the allegations of ill-treatment documented in the BICI report and expressed strong concern about the case of Abdulhadi Al-Khawaja and the 20 medical professionals who are currently serving prison sentences. Ireland made recommendations. 85. Italy considered that the implementation of the recommendations contained in the BICI report was of fundamental importance for national reconciliation and for stepping up the pace of reforms in the country. It welcomed measures already adopted in this regard. Italy enquired about the concrete measures undertaken to rebuild some of the demolished religious Shia worship sites and mosques. It made recommendations. 86. Japan mentioned that despite the recommendations made during the previous UPR  that the draft press law should not to be unduly restrictive on freedom of expression, there have been reports that the amended press law further restricts this right. Japan mentioned that a tentative response had been made to a previous recommendation to grant citizenship to children born of Bahraini mothers and foreign father. Japan made recommendations. 87. Jordan commended Bahrain for its protection of economic, social and cultural rights, as well as progress made with regard to civil and political rights. It valued the recent legislative and institutional reforms recently undertaken by Bahrain and urged the kingdom to continue implementing the recommendations of the BICI and the national dialogue. Jordan made recommendations. 88. Kuwait commended Bahrain’s report as it highlighted the challenges faced in the light of the recent events and the necessary measures taken to resolve the crises so as to ensure public safety and preserve the rights of citizens. It commended Bahrain’s commitment to implementing the recommendations of the BICI. Kuwait made recommendations. 89. Latvia noted that there was room for improvement with regard to Bahrain’s cooperation with special procedures mandate holders, and that it had signed the Rome Statute. Latvia made recommendations. 90. Lebanon welcomed Bahrain’s objective and comprehensive report for the second UPR as well as the comprehensive and objective methodology followed in the preparation of the national report. Lebanon made one recommendation. 91. Libya commended Bahrain’s report, its commitment to implementing the recommendations of the first UPR, and its cooperation with the human rights mechanisms. Libya commended the establishment of the BICI and Bahrain’s willingness to implement its recommendations in accordance with a timetable so as to fulfil the aspirations of the people who participated in the reconciliation and dialogue. Libya did not make any recommendations. 92. Malaysia recognized Bahrain’s ongoing commitment to the promotion of human rights through its achievements in education, health, constitutional reform and human and social development. It encouraged Bahrain to continue updating its National Plan for the Advancement of Women by providing adequate information and resources to enable equal participation of women in public life. Malaysia welcomed Bahrain’s commitment to implementing BICI’s recommendations. Malaysia made recommendations. 93. Maldives congratulated Bahrain on its efforts to implement the recommendations made during the first cycle of the UPR. It emphasized that events of February and March 2011 should not serve to invalidate steps taken to improve human rights. Maldives made recommendations. 94. Mauritania commended Bahrain’s interaction with the human rights mechanisms, given the recent crisis, and Bahrain’s ability to end the crisis through the Government’s efforts to end all conflicts, as well as its achievements in this respect and its cooperation with the Human Rights Council mechanisms. It commended Bahrain’s commitment to promoting human rights. Mauritania made recommendations. 95. Mexico noted that the Special Rapporteur on the question of torture has scheduled a visit to Bahrain this year, and urged the authorities to accept other outstanding visit requests by other rapporteurs. Mexico expressed hope that constitutional reforms would bolster the independence of the legislative and the judiciary and ensure greater Government accountability. Mexico made recommendations. 96. Morocco noted that the review was taking place at a historical moment in Bahrain’s political life, when constitutional amendments necessitated by the outcome of the comprehensive national dialogue are enabling a move towards democracy. It commended Bahrain’s commitment to democracy and rule of law through the recent constitutional reforms. Morocco made recommendations. 97. The Netherlands commented on the highly visible Government repression in Bahrain since early 2011. It emphasized that major policy changes would be required with regard to freedom of speech, including in relation to the Internet, freedom of assembly, preventive detention and the treatment of detainees. It cited the cases of Mahdi Abu Dheeb and Nabil Rajab. Mindful of the BICI report, the Netherlands made recommendations. 98. Nicaragua acknowledged the commitments undertaken by Bahrain at the first UPR and the progress made in their respect. It expressed satisfaction at the steps taken to improve women’s rights and noted the recent challenges faced by Bahrain, as well as its response to demands for social change and the National Consensus Dialogue. Nicaragua made a recommendation. 99. Norway expressed concern over the ongoing developments in Bahrain and urged it to implement the recommendations of the BICI without delay and within a proper time frame. Norway made recommendations. 100. Oman commended Bahrain’s report which it felt reflected the kingdom’s commitment to human rights. It commended Bahrain’s acceptance of all of BICI’s recommendations. Oman made recommendations. 101. Pakistan acknowledged Bahrain’s efforts to fulfil the significant number of commitments made during the first UPR. It was encouraged by the honest acknowledgement of challenges and constraints faced. It noted the measures taken to redress grievances, maintain public safety, public order and national security. Pakistan welcomed the establishment of the BICI to investigate the events of February 2011 and encouraged the Government of Bahrain to continue its dialogue with all stakeholders. 102. Palestine commended Bahrain’s report and the establishment of the BICI. It commended Bahrain’s initiative to build the capacity of law enforcement officers. Palestine made one recommendation. 103. The Philippines commended Bahrain for incorporating input from civil society organizations along with relevant Government agencies in the national report. It welcomed Bahrain’s achievement in drafting a new labour law. The Philippines made a recommendation. 104. Poland thanked Bahrain for its constructive participation in the UPR process. Poland was concerned at the trial of civilians before military courts and the harsh sentences imposed on medical professionals and teachers, as well as the application of the death penalty without due process. Poland made recommendations. 105. Bangladesh appreciated the engagement of Bahrain with the Commission of Inquiry (BICI). It praised advancements made with regard to women’s rights and their empowerment. Acknowledging that there are a significant number of migrant workers in Bahrain, it expressed the wish to see improvements in the conditions of migrant workers. Bangladesh made recommendations. 106. The Republic of Korea welcomed Bahrain’s efforts to address allegations of human rights violations in 2011, in particular the establishment of the BICI. It appreciated Bahrain’s cooperation with United Nations human rights mechanisms. The Republic of Korea made recommendations. 107. The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia commended Bahrain’s report which confirms its commitment to promoting and protecting human rights, and the positive changes undertaken by Bahrain since the first UPR. It commended Bahrain’s efforts to preserve peace and stability for its people. Saudi Arabia commended Bahrain’s decision to establish the BICI, and to adopt all of its recommendations. Saudi Arabia made recommendations. 108. Senegal appreciated Bahrain’s commitment to the UPR process and the kingdom’s ongoing efforts to meet the challenges resulting from the public demonstrations. It noted with satisfaction the adoption of new legislation on migrant workers and the protection of children. Senegal made recommendations. 109. Singapore considered the establishment of the National Consensus Dialogue and the BICI as positive steps towards restoring social harmony and stability. It noted Bahrain’s efforts to promote human rights education and training and its progress with regard to gender equality and the measures taken to empower women. Singapore made recommendations. 110. Slovakia commended Bahrain for being party to major human rights instruments and welcomed Bahrain’s ratification of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. It expressed concern over the levels of force used by security personnel during and after the peaceful protests in February and March 2011. Slovakia made recommendations. 111. The delegation stated that a comprehensive law covering the written press and other media, as well as the electronic media would soon be promulgated. It indicated that the upcoming press law would provide for the establishment of a higher media council, an independent council to supervise the content of the media and to screen any incitement to hatred or violence. In addition, Bahrain has started granting broadcast licences to foreign channels; it had allowed private television channels to diffuse in the country and had not closed their websites. With regard to electronic media, the delegation stated that the Government was seeking to preclude any incitement to hatred, violence or sectarianism in all media, including the electronic media. It stated that since 2002, no journalist has been detained. 112. The delegation stated that Bahrain was State of law, therefore the activities of NGOs are regulated by the Ministry of Human Rights under Law No. 21 of 1989. In addition, NGOs have their own approved Article of Association, therefore the Ministry cannot deviate from the framework of mechanisms and procedures that guides the work of these organizations. The National Centre for NGOs Support provides the support to empower the organizations’ capabilities and enables them to operate institutionally. In additional, a number of NGOs have partnered many projects and programmes within the community partnership and financial grants programmes. 113. The delegation stated that Bahrain had enough places of worship for all faiths, and that anybody who came to Bahrain would see this coexistence of religions, of which Bahrain is proud. It stated that there were about 2,339 places of worship for Muslims. Regarding the issue of the places of worship that had been destroyed, the delegation stated that five had been reconstructed, and the rest were under consideration; also a number of buildings were being reviewed with a view to allocating the necessary budget for the reconstruction of all the places of worship that had been destroyed during last year’s unfortunate events. 114. The delegation thanked all the countries that had participated for their comments and questions. It reaffirmed that Bahrain’s commitment to deal constructively with all the recommendations submitted as it attached high importance to the UPR process. The head of delegation reaffirmed Bahrain’s commitment to protecting and promoting human rights in collaboration with all human rights mechanisms, organizations and stakeholders as well as in partnership with civil society institutions.  II. Conclusions and/or recommendations**  ** The conclusions and recommendations have not been edited. 115. The following recommendations will be examined by Bahrain, which will respond in due course, but no later than the twenty-first session of the Human Rights Council in September 2012:  115.1. Ratify OP-CAT (Czech Republic);  115.2. Consider ratifying the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture (Brazil);  115.3. Ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment; the First and Second Optional Protocols to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights; the International Convention for the Protection of all Persons against Enforced (Spain);  115.4. Accede to ICCPR OP1, ICCPR OP2, OP-CAT and ratify Rome Statute of the ICC (Estonia);  115.5. Ratify the International Convention for the Protection of all Persons against Enforced Disappearance and the Second Optional Protocol to ICCPR for the elimination of the death penalty (Uruguay);  115.6. Continue to intensify efforts to ratify the International Convention for the Protection of all Persons against Enforced Disappearance (Argentina);  115.7. Withdraw reservations to the Convention on the Elimination of all forms of Discrimination against Women and ratify its Optional Protocol (Uruguay);  115.8. Withdraw reservations to Convention on the Elimination of all forms of Discrimination against Women (Chile);  115.9. Withdraw reservations to CEDAW as well as to other conventions and ratify the Optional Protocol to CEDAW and other outstanding core human rights instruments (Slovenia);  115.10. Withdraw its reservations to CEDAW as soon as possible (Republic of Korea);  115.11. Ratify the Rome statue of the International Criminal Court, including its Agreement on Privileges and Immunities (Slovakia);  115.12. Ratify the Rome Statute of the ICC and fully align its legislation with all obligations under the Rome Statute, including incorporating the Rome Statute’s definition of crimes and general principles, as well as adopting provisions enabling cooperation with the Court (Latvia);  115.13. Ratify the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court (Costa Rica);  115.14. Ratify the International Convention for the Protection of all Persons against Enforced Disappearance (France);  115.15. Ratify the Rome Statute and take the necessary measures to ensure the full implementation of the Statute in its national legislation (Switzerland);  115.16. Ratify and fully align its national legislation with all obligations under the Rome Statue of International Criminal Court, including incorporating the Statue definition of crimes and general principles, as well as adopting provisions enabling cooperation with the Court, and to accede to the Agreement on Privileges and Immunities of the Court (Finland);  115.17. The ratification of the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court and the full alignment of Bahrain’s national legislation with its provisions (Hungary);  115.18. Bring in line the definition of the crime of torture with the Convention against Torture and accede to the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (Uruguay);  115.19. Commute all death sentences to prison terms and ratify the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights with a view to definitively abolishing the death penalty (France);  115.20. Consider joining other states in ratifying the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of their Families and the ILO Convention 189 on Decent Work for Domestic Workers, as it progressively marches towards institutionalizing protective mechanisms for migrant workers (Philippines);  115.21. Incorporate into national law Bahrain’s obligations under the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, the Convention against Torture and the Convention on the Rights of the Child (Belgium);  115.22. Explicitly criminalize torture and other cruel and inhuman treatment (Spain);  115.23. To reflect in domestic law-in particular the Penal Code and Code of Criminal Procedure-Bahrain’s obligations under international human rights laws and conventions (United Kingdom);  115.24. Align the national legislation on freedom of expression, association and assembly with country’s international HR obligations (Slovakia);  115.25. Adopt as soon as possible a legislative framework on freedom of expression, including access to internet, to decriminalize defamation and slander as crimes (Mexico);  115.26. The revision and amendment of relevant legislation, in particular Decree 32 of 2006, in order to bring it into full compliance with Bahrain’s human rights obligations under the ICCPR (Hungary);  115.27. Amend any article of its Penal Code that can be used to prosecute individuals for the exercise of the rights to freedom of expression, peaceful assembly or association, and bring its laws into line with international standards established by the International Covenant for Civil and Political Rights (Ireland);  115.28. Established proper timelines for the implementation of the recommendations of the Bahrain Independent Commission of Inquiry (Norway);  115.29. Enhance the protection for child rights by issuing the child law (Sudan);  115.30. Speed up the adoption of legislative amendments relevant to the specialized laws on freedom of expression in the Bahraini Criminal law (Egypt);  115.31. Follow up on the appreciated initiative of the Kingdom of Bahrain for the creation of the Arab Court for human rights, as reflected in the commitment of Bahrain in the promotion and protection of human rights (Jordan);  115.32. Speed up the adoption of amendments to all national legislation in particular for the penal code and relevant legislation (Mauritania);  115.33. Accelerate legislative amendments [with regards to forced disappearance] in order to include provisions on enforced disappearance in the penal code (Morocco);  115.34. Facilitate the work and function of the national human rights institution in accordance with the Paris Principles (Indonesia);  115.35. Ensure that the work of the NHRI is aligned with the Paris Principles (Maldives);  115.36. Establish a national human rights institution in full compliance with the Paris Principles (Poland);  115.37. Continue its efforts to build up capacities and knowledge of human rights in its public sector (Singapore);  115.38. Adopt a national policy on children with disabilities (Chile);  115.39. Continue progress in the implementation of policies designed for the advancement of women and ensuring quality social services that are universal in coverage and benefit the whole of the population (Cuba);  115.40. Include opposition parliamentary groups and invite civil society in the implementation of the National Consensus Dialogue (Mexico);  115.41. Take immediate actions to restore peace and the respect of human rights and fundamental freedoms (Slovenia);  115.42. Take actions to provide accountability for human rights violations (Slovenia);  115.43. Establish an adequate time frame and a transparent follow-up mechanism for an accelerated implementation of the recommendations by the Independent Commission of Inquiry (Sweden);  115.44. Reconsider the restrictions imposed by the Ministry of Social Development and take appropriate measures to ensure that civil society organizations can take an active part in the public debate on human rights (Sweden);  115.45. Implement the recommendations of the report of the Bahrain International Commission of Inquiry in such a way to foster a spirit of national unity and consensus conducive to the advancement of the reform process in line with the legitimate aspirations of the people (Turkey);  115.46. Make continuous efforts in its economic and social development, improve its legal system and ensure equal enjoyment of human rights by its people (China);  115.47. Intensify its efforts in addressing the welfare of expected levels (Bangladesh);  115.48. Continue its efforts to strengthen the policies, programs and mechanism for enhancing women rights (Bangladesh);  115.49. Continue the enactment of laws and the strengthen of policies aimed at safe guarding the position of women and strengthening their roles in society (Egypt);  115.50. Modernize the national plan for the development of Bahraini women in line with the anti-discrimination programs and to evaluate the effects of those programs and projects on the development of them and the society at large (Oman);  115.51. Continue the efforts in favour of the promotion of women's rights (Senegal);  115.52. Pursuing policies and programs in the education of citizenship and human rights as best practices (United Arab Emirates);  115.53. Implement the constitutional reforms in the elections of 2014 (Qatar);  115.54. Invite the Council to adopt the National Report of the Kingdom of Bahrain and to present the comprehensive support needed for the Kingdom of Bahrain in order to handle related challenges (Qatar);  115.55. Continuation of cooperation between governmental and non-governmental institutions, considering the dialogue and cooperation among them (Jordan);  115.56. Operationalize the fund establishment for compensation of victims of the unfortunate events recently faced Bahrain, in accordance with relevant best practices (Palestine);  115.57. Continue efforts made by the State and to increase international cooperation, in order to be exposed to all relevant international experiences (Saudi Arabia);  115.58. Continue its active engagement with the human rights mechanisms of the United Nations for the protection and promotion of human rights (Azerbaijan);  115.59. Allow the Special Rapporteur on torture to visit before the end of 2012 (Austria);  115.60. Step up its cooperation with special procedures’ mandate holders by responding positively to the visit request of the Special Rapporteur on the rights to freedom of peaceful assembly and association, and facilitating, in a timely manner, a visit by the Special Rapporteur on torture (Latvia);  115.61. Consider extending a standing invitation to all special procedures of the Human Rights Council (Latvia);  115.62. Extend an open invitation to all of the special procedures of the Human Rights Council (Uruguay);  115.63. Accept the visit of the Special Rapporteur on Freedom of assembly and association (France);  115.64. That the country visit by the Special Rapporteur on Torture is realized in the near future (Republic of Korea);  115.65. Respond favorably to the requests for visit of the country and also facilitate the visits of the Special Rapporteur on migrants, Special Rapporteur on torture and the Special Rapporteur on freedom of peaceful assembly and of association (Slovenia);  115.66. Continue and strengthen cooperation with the UN Human Rights Mechanisms and its various efforts made for human rights capacity-building (Republic of Korea);  115.67. Take additional efforts in order to improve its reporting to the treaty bodies on human rights (Belarus);  115.68. Take further measures, including legislative, in order to expand rights and opportunities of women and promote gender equality (Belarus);  115.69. Take all necessary measures to combat all forms of discrimination against women and enhance their participation is State institution (Jordan);  115.70. Meet the aspirations of groups that are the victim of discrimination (Belgium);  115.71. Continue its efforts to empower women economically, politically and socially, and to take all necessary measures to eliminate all forms of discrimination against women. (Morocco);  115.72. Strengthen its efforts to promote gender equality (Republic of Korea);  115.73. Continue promoting initiatives aimed at empowering women of the country in their economic, political and social level (Chile);  115.74. Continue to pay attention to promoting gender equality and eliminating discrimination against women (Singapore);  115.75. Continue taking temporary measures for granting citizenship to children of Bahraini women married to non-Bahrainis until the draft law amending the Nationality Law comes into effect (India);  115.76. Take necessary measures to address issues relating to foreign workers, such as their facing travel bans and sometimes loss of rights to residence and work while being investigated for financial irregularity, so that the principles of natural justice are adhered to scrupulously (India);  115.77. Continue supporting national initiatives that promote the full respect for human rights in particular the field of the rights of women (Nicaragua);  115.78. Abolish the death penalty, introducing in the meantime a formal moratorium (Austria);  115.79. Ratify the Second Optional Protocol to the ICCPR (Austria);  115.80. Establish an official moratorium on executions with a view to abolishing the death penalty (Spain);  115.81. Establish a moratorium on executions with a view to abolishing the death penalty (Italy);  115.82. Establish a moratorium on the execution of the death penalty (Germany);   115.83. Consider the possibility of repealing the death penalty from its legal system (Argentina);  115.84. Investigate the deaths in government custody (Czech Republic);  115.85. Investigate properly all alleged cases of mistreatment and torture and establish accountability of those responsible (Italy);  115.86. Prosecute effectively all security agents that have allegedly tortured or otherwise abused protestors (Austria);  115.87. Investigate and prosecute all those responsible for torture and ill-treatment, unlawful killings and widespread arbitrary arrests (Czech Republic);  115.88. Incorporate an explicit prohibition of torture and other ill-treatment, as well as a clear definition of torture, into national legislation in order to comply with the obligations derived from CAT and facilitate independent, timely and thorough investigations of all allegations of torture to facilitate appropriate redress for victims (Maldives);  115.89. Ensure that security forces respond proportionally and with the utmost restraint to non-peaceful protests (Germany);  115.90. Clearly prohibit torture and ill-treatment along with effective enforcement of relevant legislations (Republic of Korea);  115.91. Release, immediately and unconditionally, all detainees, who have participated in peaceful protests lacking credible criminal charges (Slovakia);  115.92. Prohibit torture and  other ill-treatment, in national legislation and in practice in line with its obligations under CAT, ensuring that all allegations of torture or other ill-treatment are independently, promptly and thoroughly investigated, and perpetrators are brought to justice in accordance to international fair trial standards (Slovakia);  115.93. Prevent incidents of violence against members of ethnic and religious communities (Canada);  115.94. Continue its efforts with a view to the prevention and elimination of trafficking in human beings (Azerbaijan);  115.95. Adopt legislation that allows children of Bahraini mothers and non-Bahraini fathers to obtain Bahraini nationality (Uruguay);  115.96. Take the necessary measures in order to eliminate all discriminatory treatment of Bahraini women married to non-Bahrainis (Argentina);  115.97. Increase its further efforts in the area of combating human trafficking, including considering the possibility to develop a  state program or a plan of actions aimed at strengthening the Government’s measures to prevent and eliminate sexual exploitation and trafficking of children (Belarus);  115.98. Review convictions, commute sentences, or drop charges for all persons who engaged in non-violent political expression (United States of America);  115.99. Reinstate all employees and students dismissed following the events of February and March 2011 whose political activities were consistent with the right to freedom of peaceful assembly and of association, and amend Law 21/1989 and Law 32/2006 on public gathering to bring their provisions into compliance with article 21 and 22 of ICCPR, and develop an enabling legal environment for civil society to flourish (Canada);  115.100. Release immediately and unconditionally all persons convicted for merely exercising their fundamental rights to freedom of expression and assembly, especially during anti-government protests that began in February 2011 (Czech Republic);  115.101. Release immediately all persons solely convicted or detained for offences connected to peaceful assembly and free speech (Germany);  115.102. Continue the process of reform of the security forces to provide them with better capacity and training on human rights and moderate the use of force (Spain);  115.103. Create a more diverse, inclusive police force, reflective of society (United States of America);  115.104. Continuing of institutional and capacity building of the Bahraini police forces in a way that positively reflects effective respect to human rights (Palestine);  115.105. Enhance the efforts for capacity building for police and law enforcement officers (Saudi Arabia);  115.106. Ensure that all allegation of human rights violations during and after the February – March 2011 protests by the security forces are independently, promptly and thoroughly investigated, bringing perpetrators to justice and providing victims with due redress and rehabilitation (Slovakia);  115.107. Fully implement the Bahrain Independent Commission of Inquiry’s (BICI) recommendations that cover a broad range of tasks, including the ensuring of accountability, prevention of the recurrence of human rights violations through law reform and training of law enforcement personnel, and respect of due process (Republic of Korea);  115.108. Hold officials of all ranks accountable for their actions, especially regarding allegations of killings, torture and other ill-treatment (Germany);  115.109. Take steps to develop new legislation and policies for law enforcement officials to guarantee accountability of security forces and respect for human rights (Canada);  115.110. Implement fully all recommendations made to Bahrain by the United Nations mandate holders including the immediate end of violence and release of all political prisoners and ending impunity thus bringing perpetrators to justice (Iran (Islamic Republic of));  115.111. Without delay, carry out an in-depth inquiry into past and present allegations of torture as well as all allegations of excessive and illegal use of force and bring those responsible to justice (Switzerland);  115.112. Continue the reform process and ensure accountability by investigating all allegations of torture and mistreatment and by prosecuting any individuals found responsible, including senior government officials (Norway);  115.113. Develop procedures for accountability and compensation in place in accordance with best practices and related international standards (Kuwait);  115.114. Make subject to review in civilian courts all convictions and sentences rendered by the National Security Courts (Austria);  115.115. Ensure that all detainees are charged with an offense established under the law and receive a fair trial before the ordinary criminal courts, in conformity with international standards (Belgium);  115.116. Repeal all sentences by the National Safety Court, to refer these cases to criminal courts in order that all these trials are conducted in a fair, swift and transparent manner (Germany);  115.117. Ensure that all the cases of civilians, in trials before the National Safety Court for crimes allegedly committed during protests in 2011, are referred to civilian courts (Poland);  115.118. All decisions of the National Safety Courts should be subject to review in ordinary courts (Ireland);  115.119. Laws should be enacted that would prohibit civilians being tried in military courts in the future (Ireland);  115.120. That Abdulhadi Al Khawaja be transferred to the Danish authorities for medical treatment, in line with the agreement reached on March 14th (Denmark);  115.121. Establish, in line with international standards, a standing independent body to carry out investigations of all allegations of torture and other ill-treatment, deaths in custody and unlawful killings (Finland);  115.122. Release unconditionally the individuals who were convicted by special courts, or are awaiting trial, for merely exercising their fundamental rights of expression and assembly (Norway);  115.123. Adopt standards on trials in criminal cases and also to guarantee the rights of detainees and prisoners, in keeping with best practices and relevant international standards. (Mauritania);  115.124. Implement swiftly and resolutely all the recommendations made by the BICI, including the investigation of documented human rights abuses during recent protests, with a view to ensuring full accountability, justice and reparations for the victims (Denmark);  115.125. Urgently conduct new trials of all defendants who have been convicted in national safety courts (United Kingdom);  115.126. A speedy conclusion to these cases (of human rights violations against peaceful protestors), such as the ongoing case of Abdulhadi Al-Khawaja (Australia);  115.127. Implement fully the recommendations of the BICI report (Thailand);
 115.128. Implement the recommendations contained in the Commission’s report which were all accepted by the Government, particularly the one regarding the establishment of a programme of national reconciliation (Belgium);  115.129. Establish an open, genuine, all-inclusive and effective national dialogue among different concerned parties with the aim of effectively addressing the legitimate aspirations and concerns of all the population in a democratic manner (Iran (Islamic Republic of));  115.130. Entrench in the standard procedures that every person arrested be given a copy of the arrest warrant and no person should be held incommunicado. In any event, all detention should be subject to effective monitoring by an independent body (Netherlands);  115.131. Trust be generated, through in-depth democratic reforms and promoting national social and political dialogue, that is inclusive and representative, to address the country’s central issues (Uruguay);  115.132. My country’s delegation welcomes the way in which Bahrain has managed the regrettable events of February and March 2011. We would ask Bahrain to ensure that there is follow-up of the recommendations of the BICI (Qatar);  115.133. Implements as quickly as possible recommendations drawn up by BICI (Egypt);  115.134. Finalize working on the implementation of the recommendations of the BICI and to implement the outcome of the national conciliation dialogue (Jordan);  115.135. Follow up on implementation of recommendations made by the BICI, in order to overcome the effects of unfortunate events (Kuwait);  115.136. Continue implementing the recommendations of the BICI (Oman);  115.137. Continue the implementation of all the recommendations of the BICI (Saudi Arabia);  115.138. Carry-out awareness raising campaigns on the importance of adopting a unified law on the family and increasing the minimum age for marriage (Chile);  115.139. Consider passing legislation on family law containing clear and non-discriminatory provisions on marriage, divorce, inheritance and child custody (Brazil);  115.140. Continue to take the vital steps to grant citizenship to children of Bahraini mothers in the same fashion as children of Bahraini fathers as CEDAW and the CRC have pointed out (Japan);  115.141. Enact law providing for full citizenship rights for the children of Bahrain mothers and non-Bahrain fathers (Norway);  115.142. Complete by making the amendment to the proposed amendment to the nationality law that guarantees the Bahraini nationality for children from a Bahraini mother and a non-Bahraini father law (Sudan);  115.143. Speed up the reforms on the legislation for citizenship for children of Bahraini mother and non-Bahraini father; (Algeria);  115.144. Continue to support efforts, programs and initiatives aimed at providing protection for all family members; (Saudi Arabia);  115.145. Implement the commitment to rebuild the Shi’a places of worship destroyed (Austria);  115.146. Release all political prisoners and bring its national legislation into compliance with article 19 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights which guarantees freedom of expression (France);  115.147. That human rights defenders must be protected and allowed to conduct their work without hindrance, intimidation or harassment (Norway);  115.148. Strengthen the right to freedom of expression in its new Press Law, as well as allowing foreign media to enter the country and report freely (Norway);  115.149. With respect to the draft law on the press currently under exam, repeal restrictions to freedom of expression and ensure that it comply with international norms (Chile);  115.150. Abandon any restriction or obstacle to the work of persons and institutions engaged in the protection and promotion of human rights (Switzerland);  115.151. Repeal or amend the 2002 Press Law eliminating all restrictions upon the freedom of the press not in line with relevant provisions of the ICCPR. (Austria);  115.152. Enact a progressive, substantive Freedom of Information law (Austria);  115.153. Amend the Penal Code to remove all criminal penalties for alleged libel offences and the press law to bring its provisions into compliance with article 19 of ICCPR (Canada);  115.154. Bring both the Press law and Penal Code in line with article 19 of ICCPR (Estonia);  115.155. Undertake all efforts to relax censorship and to grant oppositional groups the possibility to establish their own media outlets (Germany);  115.156. Lift all restrictions on movements of foreign journalists and international organizations defending human rights (Belgium);  115.157. Abolish legal provisions unduly restricting peaceful demonstrations, remove restrictions on freedom of expression contained in Law 32 of 2006, and allow the opposition greater access to television broadcasts, radio broadcasts and print media (Netherlands);  115.158. Cease all intimidation or repression against human rights defenders, journalists and Non-Governmental Organizations (Spain);  115.159. Release persons imprisoned as required by freedom of expression and repeal all legislation that criminalizes the exercise of this right (Switzerland);  115.160. Revise the Public Gathering Law (32/2006), so that peaceful demonstrations can be held as established by the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (Costa Rica);  115.161. Respect the legitimate rights of all its citizens to freedom of assembly and expression, and maintain its commitment to achieving concrete political reform based on respect for the legitimate rights and aspirations of all its citizens (Australia);  115.162. That further progress be made toward concrete and visible reform, including through implementation of the follow-up committee’s report, in a way which guarantees transparency and freedom of speech (Japan);  115.163. That the necessary measures are implemented to guarantee freedoms of expression, association and peaceful assembly (Japan);  115.164. Speed up as far as possible the adoption of the draft labour law including the section on domestic workers (Ecuador);  115.165. Continue its efforts in ensuring that the housing conditions of workers to be continuously inspected and monitored (Malaysia);
 115.166. Step up efforts to strengthen public education, awareness programme and skill training, particularly aimed at increasing awareness on human rights in Bahrain (Malaysia);  115.167. Strengthen education and awareness of human rights at the national level (Senegal);  115.168. Review national legislation and develop awareness and training programmes in order to eliminate legal and de facto discrimination against boys and girls with disabilities and as well as with respect to those children living in the  poorest areas of the country (Uruguay);  115.169. Continue taking necessary efforts and action to provide appropriate educational opportunities for persons with disabilities (Ecuador);  115.170. Continue strengthening efforts to guarantee access to adequate education for persons with disabilities (United Arab Emirates);  115.171. Efforts should continue to be perused in order to provide opportunities of adequate education for persons with disabilities (Yemen);  115.172. Provide adequate education opportunities for the persons with disabilities (Saudi Arabia);  115.173. Step up its efforts in promoting and protecting migrant workers (Indonesia);  115.174. Continue efforts to ensure a larger and more inclusive protection for foreign workers (Algeria);  115.175. Implements both procedural and legislative measures to protect to the utmost extent possible migrant workers in the country (Egypt);  115.176. Intensify efforts and measures to enhance and expand protection for migrant workers in Bahrain (Lebanon). 116. All conclusions and/or recommendations contained in the present report reflect the position of the submitting State(s) and/or the State under review. They should not be construed as endorsed by the Working Group as a whole. Annex [English only]   Composition of the delegation  The delegation of Bahrain was headed by H.E. Dr. Salah Bin Ali Mohamed ABDULRAHMAN, Minister of State for Human Rights and composed of the following members: • H.E. Mr. Saeed Mohamed AL FAIHANI, Undersecretary of Human Rights; • H.E. Mr. Khalid Mohamed Ishaq AL KOHEJI, Assistant Undersecretary for Society Development; • H.E. Khalifa Yousif AL KAABI, Assistant Undersecretary for Coordination and Follow-up for Human Rights Affairs; • Shaikh Hamad Salman Mohamed Ali AL KHALIFA, Legal Advisor; • Ms Zahra Ali Abdulhalil ALWAKHAYAN, Senior legal researcher; • Ms Khatoon Abdulla Ali Sabt ALBAHAY, Media Expert; • H.E. Ambassador Abdulla Abdullatif ABDULLA, Undersecretary of Ministry of Foreign Affairs; • Mr. Ali Ibrahim ALSISI, Advisor; • Ms. Dalal Jasim Abdulla ALZAYED, Member of Shura Council; • Mr. Ezuddin Khalil Ebrahim LAMOYED, Director General of the administrative policies and media; • Major General Ebrahim Habib Mohamed ALGHAITH, Inspector General; • Major General Tareq Hasan Isa ALHASAN, Head of Public Security; • Colonel Mohamed BUHAMOODA, Assistant Undersecretary of Legal Affairs; • Captain Rashed BUNAJMA, Director of Legal Affairs Directorate; • Captain Abdulla Ahmed Abdulla MOHAMED, General Directorate, Ministry of the Interior Court; • Ms. Nayla Isa Mohamed Yusuf  Saleh ALSHARBATI, legal researcher; • Dr. Waleed Khalifa Yusuf ALMANEA, Chief Executive of the Salmanya Complex; • Dr. Muhammed Ahmed Hassan ABDULLAH, Director of Historical Studies Centre; • Shaikh Salman Hamad Abdulla Hamad Alkhalifa, Legal researcher; • Mr. Nayef Yusuf MAHMOOD; • Shaikh Yaser abdulrahman Mahmeed ALMAHMEED, Chair of Supreme Court of Appeals of  legality; • Mr. Fareed Abdulrahman HASAN, Acting Director of Assessment and Employee Relations; • Ms. Anfal Nofal Isa Moosa Isa ALDOSERI, Legal researcher; • Ms. Lubna SELABEEKH, Cultural Counselor to the Embassy of Bahrain to the UK; • Mrs. Nadia Khalil ALQAHIRI, Head of arbitration and the workers' complaints; • Mr. Mohamed Abdulwahab Ebrahim ALAMER, Director of Legal Affairs Directorate; • Mr. Ali Mohamed ALKOOHEJI; • Mr. Nawaf Mohamed Hamad Saqer ALMOUADA, Director General of Press and Publications; • Ms. Maysa Abdullatif  AL THAWADI, Journalist; • Mr. Waheed Joumaa AL DOY, Journalist; • Mr. Reyadh Ebrahim AL SENDI, Journalist; • Mr. Mohamed Abdulla ALDOSERI, Journalist; • Mr.  Hesham Ebrahim Ahmed Khalifa ALGHATAM, Director of Human Resources Directorate; • Mr. Nayef yusuf Mohamed MAHMOOD, Chief Prosecutor; • H.E. Dr. Yusuf Abdulkarim BUCHEERI Ambassador, Permanent Representative; • Mr. Fahad ALBAKER, Second Secretary; • Ms. Budoor AHMED, Second Secretary; • Shaikha Lulwa AL KHALIFA Third Secretary.     