Distr.: General 12 October 2009 Original: English General Assembly Human Rights Council Eleventh session Agenda item 6 Universal periodic review Report of the Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review** Cameroon * Reissued for technical reasons. 
** The annex to the present report is circulated as received. 
Contents 
Paragraphs Page Introduction............................................................................................................. 1–4 3 
I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process................................................ 5–75 3 
A. Presentation by the State under review........................................................... 5–12 3 
B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review........................ 13–75 5 
II. Conclusions and/or recommendations .................................................................... 76–79 17  Annex Composition of the delegation ......................................................................................................... 22 Introduction 1. The Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review (UPR), established in accordance with Human Rights Council resolution 5/1 of 18 June 2007, held its fourth session from 2 to 13 February 2009. The review of Cameroon was held at the 7th meeting on 5 February 2009. The delegation of Cameroon was headed by H.E. Dr. Joseph DION NGUTE, Minister Delegate of External Relations in charge of Commonwealth. At its meeting held on 9 February 2009, the Working Group adopted the present report on Cameroon. 2. On 8 September 2008, the Human Rights Council selected the following group of rapporteurs (troika) to facilitate the review of Cameroon: China, Cuba and Senegal. 3. In accordance with paragraph 15 of the annex to resolution 5/1, the following documents were issued for the review of Cameroon: (a) A national report submitted/written presentation made in accordance with paragraph 15 (a) (A/HRC/WG.6/4/CMR/1); (b) A compilation prepared by the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR), in accordance with paragraph 15 (b) (A/HRC/WG.6/4/CMR/2); (c) A summary prepared by OHCHR, in accordance with paragraph 15 (c) (A/HRC/WG.6/4/CMR/3). 4. A list of questions prepared in advance by Czech Republic, Denmark, Germany, Latvia and the Netherlands was transmitted to Cameroon through the troika. These questions are available on the extranet of the UPR. I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process A. Presentation by the State under review 5. The Minister Delegate, H. E. Dr. Joseph Dion Ngute, introduced the national report, which had been prepared in collaboration with civil society and various ministerial departments and related structures including the National Commission on Human Rights and Freedoms and outlined achievements, progress, difficulties and concerns in the field of human rights. 6. Since independence, Cameroon has undergone positive evolution attested by its accession to international legal instruments. The 1990s had been a milestone for human rights promotion and protection in Cameroon, which had adopted laws liberalising politics, media, trade union and religion. A National Committee for Human Rights and Freedoms, and a National Observatory for election (replaced by Elections Cameroon – ELECAM) had been established. The Constitution of 18 January 1996 strengthened human rights promotion and protection, emphasizing Cameroon’s commitment to the fundamental freedoms enshrined in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the Charter of the United Nations, the African Charter for Human and Peoples Rights and the other duly ratified conventions. International human rights instruments had constitutional rank. Besides ratifying numerous universal and regional instruments Cameroon had signed the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court and envisaged ratifying the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (OP-CAT) and the optional protocols to the Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC). The Special Rapporteur on torture and the Special Rapporteur of the African Commission for Human Rights and Peoples had visited the country. 7. Despite obstacles such as the social crisis of February 2008, which had necessitated strengthening measures adopted in 2006 to combat the rising cost of living, a number of efforts had been made to raise living standards. Realisation of the right to adequate housing had been particularly difficult over the past two years due to the evacuation of communities occupying non aedificandi areas. In 2008 the Government adopted a decree to grant such people compensation. 8. Protection of the rights of children is one of the government’s priorities. However, the emerging phenomena of street children and trafficking and violence against children have reduced the impact of the Government’s action to assist children. Centres to receive street children or victims of trafficking and exploitation have been created with the support of the Belgian Red Cross, the European Union and other international partners. Regarding violence against children, the Government’s willingness to bring legislation into line with relevant conventions is manifest. Forced marriage is an offence and primary education is free and compulsory. In 2004 the Government created a Ministry on Women’s and Family Issues and constant efforts are made to follow a gender-based approach. The Constitution enshrines the principle of equal rights for all citizens. A national action plan for the integration of women in development has been adopted with the support of national and international partners and the current reform of the Criminal Code would result, inter alia, in the criminalization of female genital mutilation (FGM). 9. Cameroon signed the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, the related on 1 October 2008 and had previously, in July 1983, adopted a law on the protection of such persons and set up relevant structures. In 2005, a forum on national solidarity resulted in strategies for the promotion of education of persons with disabilities. Furthermore, measures have been taken to improve the conditions for hosting and training of handicapped and vulnerable students in State universities. The rights of indigenous peoples and minorities are guaranteed by the Constitution. Cameroon has actively participated in the adoption of the Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples in September 2007. To combat exclusion and marginalisation and advance fundamental rights and socio-economic integration, the Government has established programmes of action with various partners and donors. Regarding refugees, Cameroon is party to the relevant international conventions and has adopted in July 2005 a law on status guaranteeing refugees fundamental rights. In 2006, UNHCR and the Government has jointly held training seminars to correct some shortcomings among refugee-protection officials in charge of an estimated number of 81,037 refugees. 10. To better comply with the Paris Principles, in 2004 the National Committee for Human Rights and Freedoms has been transformed into a financially autonomous National Commission for Human Rights and Freedoms. A law is being drafted to comply fully with the Paris Principles. Since its creation, the Commission has, inter alia, published reports and established several regional offices. With civil-society and UNDP support, the pedagogue notebook for teachers for human rights education, has trained trainers at the central and regional levels, initiated human right education in selected pilot institutions in the country’s 10 regions and, with the assistance of stakeholders, elaborated an action plan for human rights promotion and protection. 11. On gender discrimination, the Minister noted that some traditions remain sources of discriminatory practices and violence against women. Also of note are the quasi-economic dependence of women in certain regions, the under-education of girls in certain parts of the country, and insufficient budget allocations for programmes and projects in this regard. Problems concerning the administration of justice include a resurgence of crime, over-lengthy preventive detention, the low capacity of detention centres and financial obstacles to constructing new prisons. Regarding cooperation with treaty bodies, Cameroon has difficulties in submitting its reports, but has submitted several such documents in 2008. 12. Cameroon is determined to remain a serious and committed actor in the promotion and implementation of human rights. However, the magnitude of the task requires technical and financial assistance from the international community for personnel training and infrastructure construction. Cameroon is a country with more than 240 ethnic groups and a population of almost 18 million. Its everyday reality is very complex and calls for benevolent understanding. In the process of human rights promotion and protection, Cameroon hoped for support from the Human Rights Council (HRC) and the international community. B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review 13. During the ensuing interactive dialogue, statements were made by 54 delegations, a number of which congratulated Cameroon on its constructive and consultative approach to the UPR process. Statements were also made commending the quality of the national report and Cameroon’s commitment and achievements in the field of human rights, including its ratification of a number of international and regional human rights treaties. A number of delegations commended the transformation of the National Committee on Human Rights and Freedoms to the National Commission on Human Rights and Freedoms, in line with the Paris Principles. A number of delegations also commended the planned introduction of human rights education in primary schools. 14. Algeria recommended to Cameroon accede to the optional protocols to CRC and to the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrants Workers and Members of Their Families (ICRMW). As the report emphasized the difficulty of eradicating corruption, Algeria recommended Cameroon increase effectiveness of the Plan of Action to reform the judicial system to combat corruption more effectively. It welcomed the improvement of conditions of detention since the entry into force of the Code of Criminal Procedure and recommended Cameroon to take all necessary measures to ensure conformity of those conditions with international standards. It recommended Cameroon request technical assistance from OHCHR to improve the promotion of human rights. 15. China noted with appreciation Cameroon’s adoption of legislation to guarantee various freedoms and equal rights, its establishment of human-rights-monitoring bodies; progress in guaranteeing a fair trial for citizens and prevention of abuse of power by law enforcement personnel and active part in the human rights dialogue at the international and regional levels. As host country for the United Nations Sub-regional Centre for Human Rights and Democracy for Central Africa, Cameroon had cooperated in organizing useful activities, with good results. Also, Cameroon was party to main international and regional human rights instruments. China stressed that, as a developing country, Cameroon was faced with human rights challenges and more support and understanding were required from the international community. 16. Germany asked about the ratification of the Optional Protocols to the Convention on the Rights of the Child; the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance (CED) and the Rome Statute. Germany recommended Cameroon (a) facilitate full access to prisons by international and local humanitarian organizations and speed up judicial reforms, including the construction of new prisons; (b) raise awareness of the issue of FGM and adopt adequate legislation prohibiting the present practice and continue to implement effective programmes to sensitize the population about the harmful effects caused by this practice; (c) subscribe fully to the principle of equality in all areas of life, especially in respect of employment and occupation, and review and adapt the relevant legislation; and (d) thoroughly reform the legal framework regulating the founding and operation of independent media enterprises. 17. The Netherlands commended the Government for achievements such as hosting the United Nations Sub Regional Centre for Human Rights and Democracy. It raised concerns about independence of the media and enquired about measures taken to lift restrictions on the media, including in the Press Law and its application, such as high licensing costs, closure of various media and requesting journalists to report to the Police Office. It recommended that Cameroon reform the press law in order to lift existing restrictions on the media. It expressed concern about information provided by several NGOs on torture in prisons and the harassment of human rights defenders by security forces and asked what was doing to stop violence by its officials and impunity in many of these cases. It asked when the Government would respond to the four individual communications to the Human Rights Committee. 18. Israel took note of measures to significantly advance the human rights situation, including adoption of the Code of Criminal Procedure, which provided for practical application of the right to a fair trial. Israel also commended the cooperation between the Ministry of Justice, the Sub Regional Centre for Human Rights and Democracy in Central Africa and UNDP. Israel inquired about specific steps to realize the right to an adequate standard of living for all and ensure access to necessities fulfilling their basic needs. Noting that Cameroon had incorporated into its Constitution and relevant national legislation the right to freedom of expression and of the press, it recommended furthering advancing those fundamental rights by ensuring that national press legislation evolved in conformity with international human rights standards. Israel noted the challenges faced by Cameroon in the implementation of the promotion and protection of human rights and recommended the comprehensive review and subsequent application of the national human rights strategy in collaboration with the National Commission on Human Rights and Freedoms, and with reliance upon civil society, to ensure a long lasting and sustainable framework for the application and protection of human rights for the people of Cameroon. 19. Slovenia welcomed that Cameroon’s incorporation of the Universal Declaration on Human Rights and international treaties into its Constitution and its de facto moratorium on the death penalty. It noted reports about a large number of children sold by parents and exploited in the labour market and about increasing number of child victims of commercial sexual exploitation, including prostitution and pornography, especially among those engaged in child labour and street children. Slovenia recommended that Cameroon (a) establish an anti-trafficking public campaign and put in place measures to protect victims of trafficking and give them the necessary legal and psycho-social assistance and societal reintegration; (b) adopt legislation prohibiting FGM and other discriminatory cultural practices; (c) extend an open invitation to United Nations Human Rights Council special procedures; and (d) abolish the death penalty. 20. Noting that various NGOs had reported instances of torture, particularly torture of children by members of the security forces, Argentina asked about measures to avoid such practices. According to CEDAW, marked cultural stereotypes, as well as customs and traditions discriminating against women, persisted in Cameroon. Argentina inquired about the policies for promoting gender equality, including eliminating FGM. Argentina recalled that in 2005 the Working Group on Arbitrary Detention had called on the Government to consider introducing changes to local legislation regarding homosexuality to bring them into line with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and other international standards accepted by Cameroon. NGOs, too, had described various cases of people convicted in Cameroon for engaging in homosexuality. Argentina recommended Cameroon considering the possibility of reforming the laws criminalizing homosexuality and adapting them to international standards. 21. The Holy See mentioned that Cameroon encouraged civil society and NGOs to monitor human rights in its country and noted the establishment of a National Anti-Corruption Commission, and human rights teaching programme for police and prison guards. It noted that the police was not subject to penalties for human rights violations and inquired how the State intended to remedy that. It noted that the fact that “pygmy” communities in the country were not officially recognized in its administrative structures directly affected their ability to own land and to participate in decision-making. It recommended that Cameroon put in place a special law that will take into consideration those communities’ land rights. It emphasized that access to healthcare remained a difficulty, especially in rural areas, and inquired about surmounting the difficulties. It pointed out that enforced marriage of young girls was a serious fact, asking about the causes and means to combat it. 22. Canada recognized Cameroon’s efforts to discipline its security and police forces. It encouraged cooperation with the Commonwealth on justice reform and the prison system. Expressing some of its concerns, Canada recommended Cameroon (a) accelerate its judicial reform, reduce the number of preventive detentions and put an end to impunity for its security and police forces for any illegal act committed by their members; (b) amend its Criminal Code to abolish the criminalization of homosexual acts to conform to the provisions of the ICCPR, particularly articles 2 and 26, and the provisions of the African Charter of Human Rights and Peoples’ Rights. Sharing the concerns expressed by civil society, the opposition and the international community regarding appointments to ELECAM, including the lack of representatives of the opposition, it recommended (c) revising the composition of ELECAM to make it more balanced, diverse and representative and totally independent in order to contribute to transparent, fair and credible elections. Expressing concern at the closure of media outlets and imprisonment of journalists, Canada recommended that Cameroon (d) comply with its obligations under the ICCPR, particularly by abolishing the penalty of detention for offences of the press. 23. Azerbaijan noted that Cameroon’s national report focused on recent legislative reforms which guaranteed, inter alia, the right to a fair trial, right to participate in elections, right to safety, life, and freedom of communication, and referred to problems related to fair trial, corruption and the realization of economic, social and cultural rights. It noted the importance of bringing national legislation into conformity with international human rights standards, and of institutional reforms such as the establishment of the Constitutional Council, the National Commission on Human Rights and Freedoms which will contribute to the betterment of the human rights protection situation in the country. Azerbaijan mentioned that some children still did not have free primary education and asked about measures being taken by the Government to ensure equal access to free primary education for all children. Azerbaijan recommended Cameroon (a) consider ratifying the UNESCO Convention against Discrimination in Education and (b) continue efforts and endeavours to improve overall human rights protection situation in the country. 24. Chile asked about an increase in cases where the local community took the law into its own hands and what sanctions or punishment there were for those who resorted to lynch justice. Chile appreciated the information on conviction of Government officials for human rights violations and the State’s initiatives to disseminate information on the Convention against Torture within the security and police forces. Chile noted the difficulties faced by journalists and recommended that Cameroonian authorities adopt all necessary measures to ensure that the press could work freely and that the cases of intimidation of journalists were properly investigated and perpetrators brought to justice. Noting that CEDAW had flagged the persistence of deep-rooted cultural practices affecting women such as FGM, Chile inquired about steps to improve the situation of women and eradicate FGM. 25. Noting that in the judiciary, trial duration and procedures varied considerably, some cases appearing very long and others too short, even summary, France asked what measures were envisaged to reduce the duration of these procedures when they were excessive and to guarantee a fair and just trial. France asked about the status of the ratification of CED and whether the Government intended to accede to Rome Statute on the International Criminal court. It recommended: (a) Cameroon continue the reform of the judicial system, improve conditions of detention in prisons and better separate civil and military jurisdictions; (b) respect international provisions in the area of protection of minorities and vulnerable groups, particularly pygmies, Mbororo herdsmen, promotion of equality between men and women (c) and non-discrimination against homosexuals; (d) ensure equal access to education throughout its territory for all, without distinction as to sex or social origin; and (e) accede to the Rome Statute and ratify the CED. 26. Morocco noted with satisfaction the importance attached by Cameroon to an effective legal and institutional framework to preserve human dignity, strengthened from international standards and conventions. Morocco welcomed measures to improve living conditions of citizens, right to education, health, employment and decent housing. It asked what was being done and means to accelerate implementation, including in women’s rights, and asked about steps taken to protect rights of the vulnerable. It asked for more information about application of the de facto moratorium on use of the death penalty for the past decade. Morocco noted the financial and manpower constraints affecting implementation of the integrated programmes to combat poverty, and of the new Code of Criminal Procedure. Morocco recommended to the international community to provide assistance to Cameroon. 27. The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea took note of the positive outcome of efforts to realize the right to an adequate standard of living, supported by measures such as increased purchasing power and guarantee of the right to decent housing. It encouraged Cameroon to continue these efforts and requested further information on plans and programs to ensure that the proclaimed free primary education system benefited all children in that age. 28. Luxembourg noted that freedom of association, trade union rights and the right to strike were guaranteed by law, but that human rights defenders were often intimidated, harassed, arrested and sometimes arbitrarily detained. Such an arrest was reported in December last year following a peaceful demonstration against corruption. It recommended that Cameroon (a) cooperate with special procedures on these cases, fully respect fundamental freedoms of human rights defenders, train police forces to respect human rights and non-violent techniques of maintaining order, and to prosecute the perpetrators of violence; (b) apply strictly the Convention Against Torture and welcomed the intention announced during the review to ratify the OP-CAT. Luxembourg joined Argentina, Canada and France in recommending to Cameroon to (c) reform its legislative arsenal on this point and establish effective protection of homosexuals against discrimination and attacks. Asking about measures to sensitize and legislate in areas of domestic violence, FGM and in combating trafficking in children. It recommended to the Government to (d) continue its legislative reform and abolish all laws resulting in inequality. 29. The Czech Republic encouraged Cameroon to submit its reports to the relevant treaty bodies in a timely manner and recommended (a) the issuance and implementation of a standing invitation to all special procedures; (b) accession to the OP-CAT, establishment national of preventive mechanisms accordingly and further to adopt additional measures, including granting suspensive effect to appeals against deportation orders, to ensure its full implementation without any exceptions to the principle of non-refoulement; (c) to intensify effort to educate and train police, prison staff, law enforcement personnel and judges on all aspects of human rights; (d) the decriminalization of same-sex activity between consenting adults and adoption of measures to promote tolerance in this regards, which would also facilitate more effective educational programmes for the prevention of HIV/AIDS. 30. The United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland noted the slow speed of democratic reform and reports of vote-rigging in the last elections. Whilst commending the establishment of ELECAM, it raised the independence of members and recommended that Cameroon took steps to ensure ELECAM’s independence, including through allocation of sufficient budget. It cited the serious breaches of civil and political rights by forces of law and order in the United Nations summary report and urged Cameroon to combat impunity for police. It hoped to see the effective implementation of Cameroon’s Criminal Procedure Code and recommended that Cameroon signed and ratified the OP-CAT. It supported efforts to address corruption but urged a stronger approach. It recommended that Cameroon agreed to the visit of the Special Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of the right to freedom of opinion and expression. 31. Chad commended Cameroonian efforts to implement its national, subregional and international human rights undertakings, such as through its creation of structures to defend human rights and the funding of projects to improve living standards of its population and its cooperation with the various human rights bodies. Chad urged development partners to extend to Cameroon the aid needed to achieve it human rights objectives. 32. Brazil praised Cameroon for its inspiring record of freedom of religion, as a multi-ethnic country. Noting efforts to deal with the situation in prisons, Brazil hoped Cameroon might overcome resource constraints in implementing its recently approved Code of Criminal Procedural. Supporting Cameroon’s initiative to provide medicine at low costs or free of charge, particularly by increasing public expenditures in acquisition and distribution of medicine, Brazil noted that challenges related to social and economic development seemed to have hindered human rights efforts, particularly in the areas of education, health, housing and social security. Brazil asked Cameroon if there would be any specific area where international cooperation would be welcomed. It stressed the importance of assuring that no discrimination occurred on grounds of sex, race, origin or sexual orientation. Brazil recommended to Cameroon (a) to ratify the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of Crime of Genocide; and the OP-CAT; (b) to continue its efforts to universalize free primary education; (c) to amend domestic law regarding homosexuality, with a view to decriminalize it; and (d) to create awareness among its population with a view to adopt legislation aiming at prohibiting enforced FGM. 33. Turkey welcomed the consolidation of the right to a fair trial through entry into force of the Code of Criminal Procedure, but noted difficulties in the eradication of “popular justice”, requesting information on it and actions to fight it. Turkey encouraged Cameroon’s efforts in combating impunity of law enforcement personnel. Turkey recommended that Cameroon strengthen its efforts to eradicate corruption in order to achieve the objective of good governance and also recommended that it took into account the comments given by the CRC and the CEDAW in order to ensure better harmonization of national legislation with these Conventions and allow women and children to fully enjoy their rights. Turkey noted that the visit of the Special Rapporteur on the question of torture had favourable results and encouraged Cameroon to take this visit as an example in its future cooperation with special procedures. 34. Egypt commended steps to institutionalize human rights protection mechanisms, including the National Labour Advisory Commission. It welcomed the granting of constitutional status to international human rights treaties to which Cameroon is party, and the establishment of the OHCHR Sub-Regional Centre in Yaoundé. Egypt sought further information, with examples of activities promoting equal opportunity and treatment in employment, while defining the specific goals and objectives of their establishment and their record in achieving them. It recommended that Cameroon: (a) adopt measures to strengthen the national human rights infrastructure, and continue its efforts to spread a culture of human rights and to build the necessary institutions and provide the necessary training and capacity building to the concerned departments; and (b) identify and define its needs from OHCHR and international partners in the various domains of human rights, in order for them to assist the Government in its national efforts to overcome the obstacles and challenges hindering the fulfilment of the national plans. 35. The Philippines noted that Cameroon as a developing country needed the support of the international community to enhance local and national capabilities, asking Cameroon to outline its priorities for human rights capacity-building. It encouraged further measures to increase enrolment rates, especially of girls and indigenous children, in primary education. Philippines recommended that the Government continue to strengthen the health sector, paying particular attention to access to health services for children and indigenous peoples. 36. In its response, Cameroon stated that on freedom of the press, laws are firmly entrenched and the issues that are raised in this area generally refer to registration of press organs. A free hand is given in terms of what they say, what they write, but the Government has certain basic requirements in order to give a license. The same goes for human rights activists. People have the right to demonstrate and carry out investigations on human rights abuses, but there are rules in this regard. Concerning the ELECAM, an independent and autonomous body, the law states that the President should appoint people of integrity. He appointed those he thought had the necessary intellectual and moral baggage. It is up to those twelve members, who are not answerable to any institution, to effectively put in practice the rights given them by being independent. The institution has operational autonomy and a budget of its own. 37. The issue of corruption has made headlines in Cameroon, with a number of very important political personalities in jail because of corruption and institutions set up to tackle it. Cameroon has taken note of the request by many delegations to remove homosexuality from the penal code. This is an extremely sensitive issue in the cultural environment and whereas Cameroon understands the wishes of the international community, it must balance them with this sensitivity. Primary education is free in Cameroon, but in some parts of the country, because of cultural antecedents, it is not taken advantage of. The Government has to ensure that parents send their children to school. In secondary school, the payment is minimal and even waived in many cases. 38. There has been a moratorium on implementation of the death penalty for over 20 years. Cameroon noted the international community would like it to drop death penalty but it could not do so without carefully looking at all the parameters involved, particularly because of the public’s feelings towards certain offences. On cooperation with special procedures, Cameroon stated that in principle, it is open upon request to all Special Rapporteurs. On eliminating practices concerning, inter alia, women and children, such as FGM, forced marriage and other forms of discrimination, the reform of the criminal code is underway, and in particular, the forthcoming adoption of the code of the family and of the child. These codes will make it possible to address these issues and bring legislation in line with international commitments. 39. On combating impunity of law enforcement personnel, Cameroon enumerated three measures: normative, institutional and practical. On normative measures, there is inclusion of torture in the Criminal Code, consistent with the Convention against Torture and the promotion of a criminal procedure code which provides a number of guarantees for the accused. Institutional measures include strengthening of the prerogatives of the National Commission for Human Rights and Freedoms, the reattachment of the Penitentiary System to the Ministry of Justice and the creation therein of the Human Rights Department. Practical measures include judicial and disciplinary procedures for law enforcement officers and human rights training. On popular justice, a number of measures have been taken, including popularization of the criminal procedure code, the strengthening of human rights education and prosecution of lynch mobs, when identified. On concerns about visits to prisons, the delegation said visiting is subject to accreditation by the authorities. The ICRC has standing permission to visit and many organizations carry out their activities in the prisons. The Government is currently renovating prisons. 40. On the persistence of FGM, disparities in education between boys and girls, health issues and the economic and social rights of rural areas, it said FGM now is a relatively small phenomenon affecting 0.4 per cent of the female population. Campaigns are being carried out vis-à-vis the target communities. The Ministry of the status of women since 2004 has been visiting regions to meet institutional leaders and engage in dialogue. The Government has identified areas with low school attendance and has embarked on campaigns with target groups, backed by UNICEF. On access to health and education in rural areas, a number of programs are being carried out by the Government. 41. India was encouraged to learn that the Government was aware of gaps and intended to prioritize good governance, appreciating the introduction of free primary education and attempts to reduce disparities between boys and girls. It was pleased about the steep reduction in the price of medicines, enabling wider access, and provision for free tuberculosis and antiretroviral drugs. It asked about the functioning of the National Commission and whether it was in accordance with Paris Principles. 42. Côte d’Ivoire noted that Cameroon associated itself with political stability, virtuous economical policies and confidence in international institutions and welcomed results obtained with its national education strategy. Côte d’Ivoire asked if the Government envisaged taking steps to encourage a coordinated sub regional or regional fight against this scourge of corruption. 43. Ghana applauded reform of the electoral process, promotion of public, private, civil society partnership and provision of mechanisms to enable enjoyment of rights. It noted steps to combat impunity by law enforcement personnel and corruption through preventive and punitive means. Ghana noted that improving governance remained a priority and hoped the Government would strengthen rule of law and its judicial system even further. 44. South Africa noted the creation of a special oversight division of the police to counter impunity by law enforcement personnel; judicial reform; introduction of free primary education; and the development of health sector strategy providing a package of basic services and special programmes to combat diseases like malaria, HIV/AIDS and tuberculosis. Cognizant of the challenges of developing countries and of concerns raised by special procedures, South Africa recommended: (a) ratifying the OP-CAT; (b) adopting legislative and administrative measures to compensate and resettle indigenous communities forcibly removed from their land; (c) abolishing domestic legislation that reinforced discrimination against women; and (d) implement the recommendations of the Committee on the Rights of the Child. 45. Gabon welcomed efforts for the adoption of an internal legislative order, noting also that Cameroon has undertaken a vast programme to improve human rights promotion and protection. It requested more information on this ambitious programme, in particular and if possible, a mid-term review. Gabon recommended to the international community to provide technical assistance to Cameroon to enable it to achieve its objectives. It encouraged Cameroon to continue to maintain close cooperation with treaty bodies and OHCHR. 46. Mexico commended Cameroon for important efforts to respond to challenges faced in its development as an independent country, and for the constitutional status given to international legal instruments and their precedence over domestic legislation. Mexico welcomed the laws against gender-based violence, including against domestic violence, rape, dispositions about family law. It recommended (a) that Cameroon make all possible efforts to achieve the complete elimination of all kinds of violence against women and girls, including domestic violence; (b) that all national legislation that criminalized homosexuality be brought into line with the Universal Declaration on Human Rights and other relevant instruments; (c) that all necessary efforts be undertaken to resolve the situation of indigenous peoples, in accordance with, international standards, particularly for the Mbororo fulani peoples to have ownership of their traditional lands and the still denominated pygmy communities which according to the ILO were not officially recognized in Cameroon’s administrative structures; (d) and that Cameroon ratify and implement effectively the following: OP-CAT; the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography,(OP-CRC-SC); the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict (OP-CRC-AC); the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CPD) as well as its Optional Protocol (OP-CPD) and the Convention No. 169 of the ILO concerning indigenous and tribal peoples in independent countries. 47. Nigeria appreciated the establishment of bodies to regulate and monitor the implementation of rights, including women’s rights and empowerment, children’s rights and welfare, universal education and primary healthcare. Recognising that finances, capacity-building, technical assistance, technology and technical know-how were major impediments, Nigeria called on the international community to provide much needed support towards human rights and attainment of millennium development goals and targets. It recommended Cameroon to continue to improve its policies and programmes towards advancing the status of women, girls’ education, children with disabilities, as well as strengthening measures and mechanisms on administration of justice, investments in prison infrastructure, protection of detainees’ rights, and the overall enjoyment of civil and political rights. 48. The Russian Federation commended the efforts undertaken to protect and promote human rights, particularly of vulnerable groups such as children, the disabled and elderly, and also women and girls. It asked Cameroon about the experience of implementing the strategy of action in the area of healthcare and how the implementation of that strategy has been promoting Cameroon’s achievement of the relevant Millennium Development Goals. It asked if, given the present economic crisis, Cameroon required technical assistance from the OHCHR. 49. Latvia welcomed that the Constitution granted constitutional status to all international legal instruments ratified by Cameroon. Considering previous cooperation with special procedures mandate holders, Latvia recommended that Cameroon consider extending a standing invitation to all special procedures of the Council. 50. Estonia stated that the Special Rapporteur on torture expressed some concerns regarding the overcrowding and independent monitoring of places of detention, access by detainees to family and lawyers, and medical examination and recommended to Cameroon to ratify the OP-CAT and establish an independent and effective national preventive mechanism. Therefore, Estonia recommended to Cameroon (a) to accede to OP-CAT and establish a national preventive mechanism provided in this instrument. Asking about steps taken to combat torture against children in detention, Estonia recommended that Cameroon (b) took all necessary measures to ensure that detained children would get the necessary treatment and assistance. 51. Sudan noted that Cameroon was an exemplary country in its harmonious coexistence of religions and languages and freedom of religion. It asked the international community to assist Cameroon in realizing its human rights objectives. Sudan recommended the Government (a) to share with all members of Working Group its experience in increasing purchasing power; (b) on efforts which have eliminated squatting in Cameroon; and (c) to help in experience and efforts of religious harmony. 52. The Democratic Republic of the Congo noted that the Government was invested in guaranteeing fundamental freedoms and rehabilitating very plural traditional authorities within a secular order. It commended the 1996 Constitution, whose provisions are in line with international human rights texts. It said recent measures on misconduct and impunity regarding law enforcement officials were encouraging. It inquired if the existence of popular justice or lynching might undermine the new Code of Criminal Procedure and where difficulties lied in implementing free primary education. It recommended the Government implement its decision on the establishment of a Constitutional Court because this would provide a final guarantee for all the democratic institutions. 53. Noting with appreciation the importance attached to ensuring the right to a fair trial and implementation of the action plan on judicial reform, including consolidation of judicial independence, stronger anti-corruption measures and better application of laws, the Republic of Korea understood the difficulties in implementing the Code of Criminal Procedure completely, including resource constraints. It recommended that (a) in order to overcome these problems, the Government strengthened further the cooperation with the international community, including OHCHR and treaty bodies; and (b) that Cameroon turned more attention to some serious issues of combating impunity for law enforcement personnel and establishing an independent and effective national preventive mechanism. 54. Indonesia commended Cameroon for making good governance its national priority and its determined stand against corruption. Indonesia recommended to Cameroon that with the support of and in cooperation with the international community; the government should step up its efforts to provide free primary education to ensure the right to education of all children in the country. It also recommended striving to provide adequate housing in order to fulfil the right of families to decent housing conditions. It commended efforts to combat corruption since becoming a party to the United Nations Convention against Corruption and recommended that it continued to eradicate corruption in all its forms, through appropriate legislation. 55. Italy shared Cameroon’s concern for the minors living in the street which constituted an especially vulnerable group of the population. It recommended that Cameroon adopt effective measures to better guarantee the rights of homeless children and to implement the recommendations of the CRC in this regard; develop a national strategy to guarantee better access to education for all children and to include in its school system, at every level, appropriate measures in the area of human rights education in accordance with the 2005.2009 Plan of Action of the World Program for Human Rights Education; and strengthen measures to combat the phenomenon of FGM. 56. Afghanistan noted the Government’s determination to improve the human rights situation. It appreciated civil society participation in the preparatory process, and that Cameroon had made considerable progress in human rights; welcomed the establishment of a legal and institutional framework including for media; its work in the area of education, the right to work and the right to health. 57. Malaysia recognised challenges faced by Cameroon in human rights promotion and protection and congratulated its continuous efforts and establishment of human rights institutions. Malaysia noted disparities between children from rural areas and least developed provinces with those in urban areas, asking about specific measures to address these disparities. Malaysia recommended (a) that Cameroon considered adopting a comprehensive strategy at all levels to combat all forms of violence against women, including domestic violence; (b) to take appropriate measures to prevent and combat the sale of children, children exploited in the labour market and child victims of commercial sexual exploitation, including prostitution and pornography; and (c) to undertake further appropriate measures to improve the situation of children, in particular taking into account the rights and needs of children in its national Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper and in all other programmes intended to improve the standards of living in the country. 58. Burundi encouraged the Government to strengthen to make more effective measures such as the improvement of governance through the National Governance Program, the desire to tackle impunity of law enforcement officials, the fight against disparity between boys and girls in basic education, improvement of employment conditions through the National Conservatory for Employment and Vocational Training and the sectoral health strategy. Burundi asked the Council to provide the technical and financial support necessary. 59. Belarus noted the fairly modern judicial system in Cameroon, juvenile justice and the application of habeas corpus, recommending that Cameroon (a) continue its work to strengthen independence and authority of the national judicial system. It noted progress made towards eliminating instances of “lynch law” and Cameroon’s desire to effectively protect economic, social and cultural rights, and its fight against financial corruption and theft of state financial resources. It proposed that the Government continue efforts to protect and encourage economic and social rights of citizens. It recommended that Cameroon continue its work to improve the scope of education and its quality at every level. 60. Burkina Faso noted tangible progress in Cameroon’s human rights and highlighted Government measures to protect rights of vulnerable individuals, women and girls; establishment of a National Anti-Corruption Commission and steps to combat corruption, which encouraged good governance. It noted that the international community, particularly OHCHR, had a responsibility to provide support to the country through technical and financial assistance to ensure human rights were respected. 61. Mauritius highlighted Cameroon’s commitment to human rights, citing that international human rights instruments acquired constitutional status automatically; its intention to adhere to certain instruments to which it was not a party; and its national institutional framework to ensure their proper implementation. Mauritius noted Cameroon’s pursuit of good governance through, inter alia, strengthening of the rule of law and judicial system, and the fight against corruption and impunity of law enforcement personnel. Mauritius pointed out a lack of human rights education and dissemination, inviting it to share measures taken or envisaged. 62. Pakistan said Cameroon’s commitment to eliminate corruption and ensure good governance deserves international support. It sought information about the training and strengthening of specialized police units to intervene in cases of violence against women. It recommended that the Government should continue to be supported in its endeavours to address the issue of violence against women. 63. Uganda urged the Government to strengthen its effort to fight impunity and ensure that all persons enjoy their full rights. Uganda noted that despite the efforts of Cameroon to fight poverty, increase household income, ensure access to health and education as well as access to housing and fight against corruption, challenges still did remain. Uganda called upon the Government to double its efforts as well as the international community to extend to Cameroon the necessary assistance to enable it fulfil its obligations. Uganda encouraged Cameroon to extend an open invitation to the special procedures. 64. Serbia noted measures to improve the human rights situation, including the creation of a Special Division for Oversight for the Police in the Department of National Security and encouraged Cameroon to continue with reform. Serbia welcomed efforts in combating impunity, especially of law enforcement personnel. Serbia noted the system of education in Cameroon and inquired on the means the ministries cooperated and coordinated their actions. Noting that many children were still not receiving primary education, Serbia asked for more information on the challenges the Government was facing in this regard. 65. Lesotho noted with appreciation Cameroon’s advancement in human rights, particularly its voluntary contribution to support the work of the OHCHR. It commended Cameroon for establishment of the National Commission, an essential oversight national machinery on human rights protection. 66. Niger noted with satisfaction Cameroon’s dissemination of an integration of international human rights norms at the national level. It asked about experiences in incorporating international norms concerning women and children’s rights; on constraints encountered and its approach to remedying certain gender discrimination problems; and on the correlation between education of girls and the status of women, particularly regarding indigenous communities. As a recommendation, Niger encouraged Cameroon to intensify the rate of cooperation with treaty bodies. It also noted that Cameroon deserved the understanding and the technical and financial cooperation of the international community in human rights. 67. Congo said Cameroon’s efforts had a positive impact on the Congo and other members of the Economic and Monetary Community of Central Africa, CEMAC. Congo encouraged the Government to consolidate the many human rights achievements in the sectors of health, education and improvement of standards of living. It understood the cautious approach on a number of sensitive issues and noted that difficulties were encountered. Congo supported Cameroon’s appeal for the international community’s assistance in its noble objectives. It supported Cameroon within the context of CEMAC in the common endeavour of human rights and development of the subregion. 68. Tanzania commended the delegation for its inclusive national report, involving stakeholders within and outside Cameroon. It recommended that the same trend should be maintained during the implementation phase of the recommendations made during the meeting of this Working Group. Tanzania was pleased to note efforts in response to HIV/AIDS, and that tuberculosis and antiretrovirals were provided free of charge, it asked whether policies and legislation backed up such service provision. It asked whether HIV/AIDS related cases could be litigated in Cameroon and, if not, it recommended that the Government considered enacting a specific law for that. It requested further clarification on forced evictions to eliminate squatting. 69. Botswana requested additional information on the specific initiatives to address the problems of a lack of a national policy to promote equality of opportunities and treatment in respect of employment and occupation, as identified by the ILO Committee of Experts in 2008. It asked Cameroon to share experiences on measures to address the concerns regarding treatment of minorities and indigenous peoples vis-à-vis other ethnic communities. Mindful of challenges that Cameroon acknowledged it faced in effectively meeting its human rights obligations, Botswana recommended to Cameroon to (a) continue its legislative reforms to address discriminatory cultural practices, including FGM, in the line with CEDAW recommendations; and to (b) continue to implement its initiatives in combating the HIV/AIDS pandemic in their country, and shared its experiences in this regard. It finally requested that the international community assisted Cameroon with technical and financial support to effectively honour its human rights obligations. 70. Equatorial Guinea noted with satisfaction the implementation and incorporation of the Universal Declaration on Human Rights by Cameroon into its legislation and encouraged and urged its government to continue cooperating with the fundamental international, regional and subregional instruments, for African and CEMAC solidarity and the respect for the African Charter for Human and People’s Rights. It supported the Sectoral Strategy for Health and welcomed the Plan for Good Governance to protect the economic, social and cultural rights of its citizens. It sought information on measures and policies to fight corruption, especially on the structure for re-housing victims of forced eviction. 71. Haiti recommended that Cameroon (a) ratified fundamental instruments to which it was not yet party, notably OP-CRC-AC and OP-CRC-SC; and (b) corrected the shortcoming in the Code of Criminal Procedure, notably the need to respect requirements for serving warrants of arrest at all times, including on Sundays and holidays, and to address the current possibility for police officers to proceed to an arrest without a warrant. 72. Djibouti commended Cameroon for the priority accorded to health care, education and the rights of women and children, and for good governance, tolerance and spirit of brotherhood prevailing in the country. Djibouti recommended Cameroon to consider ratifying the CPD as well as the CED and the OP-CAT. 73. In its response, Cameroon thanked delegations for the statements encouraging it in the perennial exercise of entrenching a human rights culture in Cameroon. On questions regarding cooperation with human rights institutions, it reiterated that Cameroon was in the process of ratifying a number of instruments and the process of adhesion has begun for others. It desired full cooperation with all institutions, and confirmed that Cameroon would welcome the Special Rapporteur for the promotion and protection of freedom of expression. On institutions relating to human rights, the delegation cited the Constitutional Court, saying relevant legislation was in place and appointment of members would follow soon. On respect for indigenous rights, it said legislation was being prepared to entrench some of those rights, dealing with issues such as grazing rights and rights to their specific way of life. 74. The Chairperson of the Human Rights Commission said the new commission comprised of 30 members — 19 men and 11 women. Its main difficulty is in having effective presences in the vast, diverse territory of Cameroon. He said it undertook constructive engagement focused on projects likely to significantly impact the human rights culture in Cameroon. In addition to initiatives mentioned above, the Commission produces publications and radio and news programmes on human rights, and has a complaint management service to deal with complaints of human rights violations. He said the Commission appreciated the contribution of development partners and valued assistance from the Commonwealth Secretariat, UNDP and the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie. 75. The delegation said it was aware that sometimes law enforcement authorities might, in their exuberance, perpetrate certain abuses, and has thus embarked on a process to imbue them with a sense of respect for human rights. Cameroon also has actions geared towards improving democratic governance. Management of elections is an important factor in this regard, thus the establishment of ELECAM which, with full independence, has the mandate to carry out the full operation of elections from start to finish. It acknowledged that its resources are limited in the conferment of benefits in education or housing to citizens. It expressed gratitude to all those who give assistance in this connection. Mindful that corruption has eroded a lot of what could have been achieved, it said the Government’s anti-corruption drive is real, strong and effective, and will produce desired results within a short time. Cameroon is in the process of strengthening its economy, which has been diversified and new areas such as mining activities are being emphasized. It expressed hope that it would be in a position to continue to provide for the population, especially in rural areas. The delegation was mindful that there was not a quick fix to these problems and only with such kinds of discourse and encouragement, Cameroon will achieve its desired objectives. II. 	Conclusions and/or recommendations 76. The recommendations formulated during the interactive dialogue have been examined by Cameroon and the recommendations listed below enjoy the support of Cameroon: 1. 	Accede to the two optional protocols to the Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC) (Algeria); 

2.
ratify and implement effectively the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography (OP-CRC-SC) and the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict (OP-CRC-AC) (Mexico); 

3.
ratify fundamental instruments to which it is not yet party, notably OP.CRC-AC and OP-CRC-SC (Haiti); 

4.
ratify and implement effectively the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (OP-CAT) (Mexico, Luxembourg); 

5.
sign and ratify the OP-CAT (United Kingdom, Brazil, South Africa, Djibouti); 

6.
accede to OP-CAT and establish a national preventive mechanism provided by the Protocol (Estonia, Czech Republic); 7. 	Accede to the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrants Workers and Members of Their Families (ICRMW) (Algeria); 8. 	Ratify and implement the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CPD) (Djibouti, Mexico); Ratify and implement the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities as well as the Optional Protocol thereto (Mexico); 9. 	Ratify the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance (France); or consider ratifying the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance (CED) (Djibouti); 10. 	Ratify the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide (Brazil); 11. 	Consider the ratification of UNESCO Convention against discrimination in education (Azerbaijan); 12. 	Review and implement the national human rights strategy in collaboration with the National Commission on Human Rights and Freedoms, and with reliance upon civil society, to ensure a long lasting and sustainable framework for the application and protection of human rights for the people of Cameroon (Israel); 13. 	Adopt measures to strengthen the national human rights infrastructure, and continue its efforts to spread a culture of human rights and to build the necessary institutions and provide the necessary training and capacity building to the concerned departments (Egypt); 14. 	Implement its decision on the establishment of a Constitutional Court (Democratic Republic of the Congo); 15. 	Strengthen further the cooperation with the international community, including OHCHR and treaty bodies (Republic of Korea); intensify the rate of cooperation with treaty bodies (Niger); 16. Agree to the visit of the Special Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of the right to freedom of opinion and expression (United Kingdom); 
17. Request technical assistance from OHCHR to improve the promotion of human rights (Algeria); 
18. identify and define its needs from OHCHR and international partners in the various domains of human rights, in order for them to assist the Government in its national efforts to overcome the obstacles and challenges hindering the fulfilment of the national plans (Egypt); 19. Improve domestic legislation to fight discrimination against women (South Africa); promote equality between men and women (France); 20. 
Continue to improve its policies and programmes towards advancing the status of women, girls’ education, children with disabilities, as well as strengthening measures and mechanisms on administration of justice, investments in prison infrastructure, protection of detainees’ rights, and the overall enjoyment of civil and political rights (Nigeria); 21. Raise awareness as to the issue of female genital mutilation (FGM) and adopt adequate legislation prohibiting the practice of FGM and continue to implement effective programmes to sensitize the population about the harmful effects caused by this practice (Germany);
22. 
adopt legislation prohibiting FGM (Brazil); adopt legislation prohibiting FGM and other discriminatory cultural practices (Slovenia);23. strengthen measures to combat the phenomenon of FGM (Italy);
24. 
continue its legislative reforms to address discriminatory cultural practices, including FGM, in line with CEDAW recommendations (Botswana);25. 
Take into account the comments of CRC and CEDAW in order to ensure better harmonisation of the national legislation with conventions and to allow women and children to fully enjoy their rights (Turkey); 26. Make all possible efforts to achieve the complete elimination of all kinds of violence against women and girls, including domestic violence (Mexico); consider adopting a comprehensive strategy at all levels to combat all forms of violence against women, including domestic violence (Malaysia); continue to be supported in its endeavours to address the issue of violence against women (Pakistan); Implement the recommendations of CRC in order to guarantee the rights of homeless children (Italy); Improve measures to prevent and combat the sale of children, children exploited in the labour market and child victims of commercial sexual exploitation, including prostitution and pornography (Malaysia); Improve the child anti-trafficking public campaign and put in place measures to protect victims of trafficking and put in place the necessary legal and psychosocial assistance and societal reintegration (Slovenia); Continue the ongoing efforts to ensure the conformity of detention conditions with international standards (Algeria); facilitate full access of international and local humanitarian organisations to prisons and speed up judicial reforms, including the construction of new prisons (Germany); 22. 	Continue its work to strengthen independence and authority of the national judicial system (Belarus); 23. 	Accelerate the judicial reform, reduce the number of preventive detentions and strengthen efforts to put an end to impunity for police and security forces for any illegal act committed by their members (Canada); continue the reform of the judicial system, to improve conditions of detention in prisons, and better separate civil and military jurisdictions (France); 24. 	Strengthen its cooperation with special procedure on reported cases of illegal arrest, fully respect the fundamental liberties of human rights defenders and train the police forces to respect human rights and non.violent techniques of maintaining order, and to prosecute the perpetrators of violence (Luxembourg); intensify efforts to educate and train police, prison staff, law enforcement personnel and judges on all aspects of human rights (Czech Republic); turn more attention to some serious issues of combating impunity for law enforcement personnel and establishing an independent and effective national preventive mechanism (Republic of Korea); 25. 	Further advance access to the right to freedom of expression and freedom of the press by ensuring current national press legislation evolves in conformity with international human rights standards (Israel); 26. 	Adopt all necessary measures to ensure that the press could work freely (Chile); 27. 	Increase effectiveness of the plan of action to improve the judicial system to combat corruption more effectively (Algeria); strengthen its efforts to eradicate corruption in order to achieve the objectives of good governance (Turkey); continue to eradicate corruption in all its form, through the appropriate legislation (Indonesia); 28. 	Take steps to ensure the independence of Elections Cameroon (ELECAM), including through allocation of sufficient budget (United Kingdom); 29. 	Share experience and efforts on religious harmony (Sudan); 30. 	Undertake further appropriate measures to improve the situation of children, in particular taking into account the rights and needs of children in its national Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper and in all other programmes intended to improve the standards of living in the country (Malaysia); 31. 	Continue to implement its initiatives in combating the HIV/AIDS pandemic and share its experiences in this regard (Botswana); 32.	 Continue its efforts to strengthen the health sector, paying particular attention to access to health services for children and indigenous peoples (Philippines); 33. 	Continue to reinforce measures to ensure that detained children get the necessary treatment and assistance (Estonia); 34. 	Strive to provide adequate housing in order to fulfil the right of families to decent housing conditions (Indonesia); 35. 	Share with all members of the Working Group its experience in increasing purchasing power and on efforts which have eliminated squatting in Cameroon (Sudan); 36. 	Continue its efforts to ensure equal access to education throughout its territory for all, without distinction as to sex or social origins (France); continue its work to improve the scope of education and its quality at every level (Belarus); continue its efforts to universalize free primary education (Brazil); step up its efforts to provide free primary education to ensure the right to education of all children (Indonesia); strengthen the national strategy to guarantee better access to education for all children and to include in the school system, at any level, appropriate measures in the area of human rights education in accordance with the 2005–2009 Plan of Action of the World Programme for Human Rights Education (Italy); 37. 	Respect international provisions in the area of the protection of minorities and vulnerable groups, particularly Pygmies and Mbororo (France); reinforce measures to compensate and resettle indigenous communities forcibly removed from their land (South Africa); reinforce measures to resolve the situation of indigenous peoples, in accordance with international standards, particularly for the Mbororos fulany and pygmy peoples to have ownership of their traditional lands (Mexico); 38. 	Continue efforts and endeavours to improve the overall human rights protection situation in the country (Azerbaijan); 39. 	Maintain, during the implementation phase of the recommendations made during the meeting of this Working Group, the inclusive approach adopted during the preparatory phase of the national report (Tanzania); 40. 	Request the international community to provide assistance (Morocco); and technical assistance to Cameroon to enable it to achieve its objectives (Gabon). 77. The following recommendations will be examined by Cameroon which will provide responses in due time. The response of Cameroon to these recommendations will be included in the outcome report to be adopted by the Human Rights Council at its eleventh session: 1. 	Further adopt additional measures, including granting suspensive effect to appeals against deportation orders, to ensure its full implementation without any exceptions of the principle of non-refoulement (Czech Republic); 2. 	Accede to the Rome Statute (France); ratify the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court (Brazil); 3. 	Ratify the Convention No. 169 of the ILO concerning indigenous and tribal peoples in independent countries (Mexico); 4. 	Extend an open invitation to the special procedures of United Nations Human Rights Council (Slovenia, Czech Republic, Latvia); 5. 	Abolish the death penalty (Slovenia); 6. 	Consider enacting a specific law for HIV/AIDS related cases (Tanzania); 7. 	Put in place a special law that will take into consideration the land rights of the “pygmy” communities (Holy See). 78. The recommendations noted in the present report at paragraphs 16 (c), 16 (d), 17, 20, 22 (b), 22 (c), 22 (d), 25 (c), 28 (c), 29 (d), 32 (c), 46 (b) and 71 (b) above did not enjoy the support of Cameroon. 79. All conclusions and/or recommendations contained in the present report reflect the position of the submitting State(s) and /or the State under review thereon. They should not be construed as endorsed by the Working Group as a whole. Annex Composition of the delegation The delegation of Cameroon was headed by H.E. Mr. Dion Ngute, and composed of 12 members: S.E. M. Joseph Dion Ngute, Ministre Délégué auprès du Ministre des Relations Extérieures en charge du Commonwealth, Chef de Délégation; S.E. M. Anatole Fabien Marie Nkou, Ambassadeur, Représentant Permanent, Chef de Délégation Adjoint; Mr. Francis Ngantcha, Ministre Conseiller, Mission Permanente du Cameroun à Genève, membre; Mr. Adolphe Minkoa She, Vice-recteur, Université de Yaoundé II, membre; Mr. Prosper Bomba Ngong, Directeur chargé des Nations Unies, Ministère des Relations Extérieures, membre; Mr. Michel Mahouve, Directeur des Droits de l’homme et de la coopération internationale, Ministère de la Justice, membre; Mr. Ovale Ze, Directeur de l’Administration Pénitentiaire, Ministère de la Justice, membre; Mme. Chantal Nama, Sous-Directeur chargé des Nations Unies, Ministère des Relations Extérieures, membre; Mr. Chimuta Divine Banda, Président de la Commission Nationale des Droits de l’Homme, membre; Mr. Innocent Bertin Bidima, Premier Secrétaire à la Mission Permanente du Cameroun à Genève, membre; Mr. Aurélien Eteki, Premier Secrétaire à la Mission Permanente du Cameroun à Genève, membre; Mr. Paul Batibonak, Premier Secrétaire à la Mission Permanente du Cameroun a Genève, membre. 