Distr.: General 5 October 2009 English Original: English/French General Assembly Human Rights Council Twelfth session Agenda item 6 Universal Periodic Review Report of the Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review** Chad * Reissued for technical reasons. ** The annex to the present report is circulated as received. Contents Paragraphs Page Introduction............................................................................................................. 1–4 3 I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process................................................ 5–81 3 A. Presentation by the State under review........................................................... 5–22 3 B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review........................ 23–81 6 II. Conclusions and/or recommendations .................................................................... 82–85 15  Annex Composition of the delegation ....................................................................................................... 23 Introduction 1. The Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review (UPR), established in accordance with Human Rights Council resolution 5/1 of 18 June 2007, held its fifth session from 4 to 15 May 2009. The review of Chad was held at the 4th meeting on 5 May 2009. The delegation of Chad was headed by H.E. Abderaman Djasnabaille, Minister in charge of Human Rights and promotion of liberties. At its 8th meeting, on 8 May 2009, the Working Group adopted the present report on Chad. 2. On 8 September 2008, the Human Rights Council selected the following group of rapporteurs (troika) to facilitate the review of Chad: France, Slovenia and Zambia. 3. In accordance with paragraph 15 of the annex to resolution 5/1, the following documents were issued for the review of Chad: (a) A written presentation made in accordance with paragraph 15 (a) (A/HRC/WG.6/5/TCD/1); (b) A compilation prepared by the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) in accordance with paragraph 15 (b) (A/HRC/WG.6/5/TCD/2); (c) A summary prepared by OHCHR in accordance with paragraph 15 (c) (A/HRC/WG.6/5/TCD/3). 4. A list of questions prepared in advance by Argentina, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Germany, Hungary, Latvia, Sweden, the Netherlands and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland was transmitted to Chad through the troika. These questions are available on the extranet of the UPR. I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process A. Presentation by the State under review 5. The delegation states that, since achieving national and international sovereignty on 11 August 1960, Chad has undergone a period of political instability characterized by armed rebellions and intercommunity conflicts which were characterized by and encouraged serious human rights violations. It notes that this situation unfortunately led to the outbreak of civil war in 1979 and brought to power the Chad National Liberation Front, FROLINAT, which installed a transitional Government of national unity. This Government set up a court martial, which carried out public executions in order to put an end to the crime wave which was sweeping the country at that time. 6. The delegation adds that the assumption of power by Hissein Habré on 7 June 1982 was marked by serious human rights violations and that, according to the commission of inquiry set up following the fall of Hissein Habré’s regime, over 40,000 people were killed, excluding the victims of collateral damage. So grave were the violations identified by the commission that the victims brought national and international legal proceedings, to which the Government of Chad lent its full support; their outcome is eagerly awaited. 7. The delegation states that, on 1 December 1990, the Patriotic Salvation Movement (MPS) came to power, bringing Hissein Habré’s dictatorship to an end. This led to the installation of a legal, political and institutional framework conducive to the establishment of a State based on the rule of law and pluralist democracy, in which fundamental human rights and liberties, the dignity of the human person and justice are guaranteed, protected and promoted. According to the delegation, the establishment of democracy made it possible in 1993 to hold a Sovereign National Conference, in which the various political and social classes were able to express their views and take important decisions. A Higher Council of Transition and a broad national-unity Government were set up, and a National Human Rights Commission was established in 1994 to deal with all the violations and provide advice and recommendations to the Government on all human rights issues. A review of the enactments setting up the Commission is planned in order to bring it into line with the Paris Principles. 8. The delegation adds that a Constitution was adopted by referendum on 31 March 1996. It guarantees respect for human rights and all the fundamental freedoms embodied in international legal instruments. Free and democratic presidential elections took place in 1996, and free and democratic legislative elections in 1997. The delegation states that other national institutions were progressively established thereafter, including the Supreme Court, the Constitutional Council, the High Court of Justice, and the High Council for Communication and the Office of the Ombudsman. The creation in 2005 of a separate ministry responsible for human rights, whose scope was widened in 2008 to include the promotion of freedoms, is evidence, if needed, that the President of the Republic, His Excellency Mr. Idriss Deby Itno, and the Government are fully determined to give concrete expression to the defence and protection of human rights. 9. According to the delegation, the Government’s efforts, and those of politicians and civil society, have been affected by the Darfur crisis, which began in 2003 with a massive influx of displaced persons and refugees, intercommunity conflicts and incursions by the Janjaweed and armed groups, which eventually led to attacks on N’Djamena in April 2006 and February 2008. These various crises once again gave rise to human rights violations, in response to which the Government declared a state of emergency to halt the serious disruptions of public order resulting from the lack of security in the six regions affected by the disturbances and in the city of N’Djamena. This measure, which was dictated by circumstances and in force for a limited period, allowed public and constitutional order to be re-established. 10. The delegation reports that in order to shed light on the serious human rights violations that occurred during these events, the Government set up a commission of inquiry, composed primarily of representatives of civil society and international observers. The commission has reached its conclusions, which will serve as a basis for initiating a judicial investigation to determine responsibility. A technical follow-up committee has been set up to monitor the recommendations made by the commission. 11. The delegation reports that the importance attached by the Government to public health issues led it, in 1999, to adopt a law establishing a system of community participation in health costs and, in 2000, a pharmacy law. However, it should be noted that the strategies in place far from cover the ever-growing health needs of the population of Chad. 12. Concerning the right to education, the delegation states that, in accordance with its means, the Government does its best to provide teachers’ salaries. However, it notes the lack of adequate infrastructure and the fact that teachers are poorly trained (62 per cent lack vocational training). Free and compulsory schooling is guaranteed under article 35 of the Constitution and secondary education is universal and accessible to everyone throughout the country. Technical and vocational education, on the other hand, is not. The delegation emphasizes that efforts are being made to make higher education fully accessible for all students with a school-leaving certificate and notes the lack of university teaching staff. The socio-economic situation of students is currently being re-evaluated in order to find the best ways of promoting higher education. 13. The delegation states that, in 2002, a sectoral education policy was adopted as part of the drive to achieve the Millennium Development Goals. A project to support reform of the Chadian education system was launched. 14. Chad is a country in which the illiteracy rate is quite high and efforts are being made to provide basic education. Thus, in order to combat illiteracy, a decree was issued by the Government in 2000 under which a centre for the elimination of illiteracy in Chad was established. Similarly, the Government is keen to ensure that deaf, blind and sick children are able to attend school and there are training schools to provide for their education. One of the Government’s policies is to lower the cost of education for girls, social-welfare cases and poor children. 15. According to the delegation, the right to culture is guaranteed by the Constitution, and it is the duty of the State to safeguard and promote the national values of civilization. Every citizen has the right to create, to enjoy protection of, and to benefit from his intellectual and artistic works. There is a ministry specifically responsible for culture, youth and sport which deals with all these matters. 16. The delegation notes that, since 1990, Chad has embarked upon a process of ensuring women’s full development. Since ratification of the Convention on the Rights of the Child, with the support of partners and in particular UNICEF, a dedicated programme has been set up for children. 17. The Act of 9 May 2007 was adopted to safeguard the rights of disabled persons. 18. The delegation states that freedom of opinion and expression is recognized for all. Everyone is free to seek and receive information, since the Constitution provides that the freedoms of opinion and expression, communication, conscience, religion, the press, association, assembly, movement, demonstration and parades are guaranteed to all. These freedoms may only be restricted with due respect for the freedoms and rights of others and in response to the need to safeguard public order and morals (art. 27). 19. The delegation mentions that the freedom to form a political party or to belong to the political party of one’s choice is recognized in the national legislation and that more than 100 legally constituted political parties are active in Chad. In order to encourage this democratic form of expression, these political parties each receive a subsidy for their operating costs. Similarly, the freedom of all citizens to express their ideas and opinions through any means of communication is recognized, as is freedom of the press and printing (Press Act, arts. 1 and 2). Chad’s numerous independent radio stations and newspapers contribute to the exercise of these freedoms. 20. The Government of Chad has issued a law regulating the press. Freedom of expression is recognized by law and exercised by all citizens, and political debates are broadcast even on national radio. Private radio stations are governed by a specific law. The delegation notes, however, that illiteracy, widespread poverty, the inadequate resources of newspapers and private radio stations, and the psychological aftermath of long years of political repression constitute undoubted impediments to the full development of these public freedoms. 21. The delegation states that, since the adoption of various laws relating to freedom of association, especially after 1990, there has been a proliferation of various kinds of associations and trade unions. 22. Finally, the delegation reports that a comprehensive reform aimed at harmonizing the enactments governing the judicial system with international standards, in particular the Criminal Code, the Codes of Civil and Criminal Procedure and the Family Code, has been launched and is in its final stages. The delegation reiterates its willingness to cooperate fully with the various United Nations bodies in this area and emphasizes that Chad had always responded favourably to all the requests to visit it has received and is willing to extend an open invitation to mandate holders. B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review 23. During the interactive dialogue, 49 delegations made statements. A number of delegations praised Chad for its comprehensive and frank presentation, for its national report and its commitment to the UPR process. They stated that the Constitution adopted in 1996, the free presidential elections the same year and the 1997 legislative elections, had paved the way for the gradual establishment of democratic national institutions. Several delegations underlined the need for international assistance and noted Chad’s accession to a number of international instruments, commended significant steps taken in various sectors including education and health, and recognized the constraints stemming from the volatile political and security situation, the recurrence of cross-border hostilities, the burden of protracted refugees and internally displaced persons. 24. Brazil commended Chad in particular for promoting a judicial reform and for establishing a National Committee for the Elimination of Illiteracy in Chad. Brazil recommended to the Government of Chad to: (a) ratify the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide; (b) eradicate possible discriminatory laws from its legislation, with a view to guarantee the effective promotion and protection of the rights of vulnerable groups, such as women and children; and (c) accomplish progressively the human right goals as set up by Human Rights Council resolution 9/12. 25. The United Kingdom emphasised the need for free and fair elections, close collaboration with MINURCAT and successful implementation of the August accords. It raised concerns on impunity and security, as well as the detention of opposition leaders and reports of extrajudicial killings. It welcomed positive cooperation on child soldiers and called for a national action plan to eradicate this problem. The United Kingdom made four recommendations: that Chad (a) take steps to strengthen the criminal justice system and, in addition, cooperate fully with the efforts of the United Nations Mission in the Central African Republic and Chad (MINURCAT) in this area; (b) accept the request to visit by the Special Rapporteur on extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions; (c) develop now an action plan to prevent the illegal recruitment of children into its forces and establish transparent procedures for the verification and release of children in the Chadian army; (d) sign and ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture. 26. Algeria recommended Chad (a) to continue its efforts to ensure education for all children and to proceed, with the support and the assistance of the international community, to the necessary arrangements for the improvement of its educational system. Algeria asked Chad whether an evaluation of needs for technical and financial assistance was carried out by the Government, and whether steps have been undertaken to ensure that this kind of assistance be provided by United Nations institutions and bodies. While commending the Government’s initiative for the organisation of a forum to evaluate the human rights situation in the country, Algeria recommended that (b) solutions to be explored in this framework include training and awareness programs on human rights and international treaties to the benefit of relevant officers, including United Nations technical assistance projects. Algeria recommended the Government (c) to continue in its efforts for the reinforcement of the Rule of Law and respect for and the actual implementation of human rights throughout the country, in particular through the completion of the existing reform process in the fields of justice, territorial administration, the civil registry, the Civil Code and the Family Code. 27. France called on State authorities to increase efforts to demobilize children enrolled in the Chadian armed forces and to take measures to prevent further recruitment, including by rebel groups. It also called for strengthening of the rule of law and improvement of judicial and prison systems, and requested that illegal detention places be closed. France recommended that Chad (a) implement the recommendations of the Commission of Enquiry regarding the events of February 2008, (b) end impunity for uniformed personnel, (c) ratify the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance, (d) take measures to establish a new legislative framework ensuring freedom of the press. 28. Saudi Arabia noted that many institutions for human rights were established and that the Government combats illiteracy and provides free and compulsory education. It recommended that the Working Group report reaffirm the importance for the Government to continue its efforts and initiatives to spread education and requested information regarding the forum that will be organized on the human rights situation in Chad, in particular the right to education. 29. The Netherlands referred in particular to the disappearance of opposition leader Ibni Omar Saleh after his arrest in February 2008 and looked forward to the outcome of the inquiry into the events in Ndjamena in February 2008. The Netherlands recommended Chad to (a) bring officials responsible for acts of arbitrary arrest, extrajudicial executions and the use of excessive force, torture and rape to justice; (b) ensure due process to all detainees; and (c) maintain records for all persons detained by the security forces. The Netherlands referred to reports received that women are still victims of certain discriminatory practices and, in that regard, recommended that the Government of Chad (d) ensure that appropriate penalties are applied for acts such as female genital mutilation, forced marriages and sexual violence; (e) ensure that, in practice, girls have equal access to education; and (f) amend existing legislation so as to ensure equal succession and inheritance rights for women. 30. Mali noted the progress made by Chad and recommended that the international community provide appropriate assistance, enabling Chad to achieve the objectives envisaged in paragraph 89 of its national report. 31. Noting that Chad would not be able to face its numerous challenges alone, Côte d’Ivoire recommended, especially in the view of a request for technical assistance by the United Nations, (a) to reinforce the capacities of the Ministry of Human Rights and of the Promotion of Liberty; to energize the National Commission on Human Rights and to harmonize national legislation with international human rights instruments. Finally, Côte d’Ivoire called on Chad (b) to take concrete and resolved measures to offer immediate protection to civilians, and to propose to the armed opposition a viable mechanism for a national dialogue conducive to bringing peace and serenity back to the whole country. 32. Switzerland recommended that Chad: (a) take all possible measures to ensure protection of civilians, in particular vulnerable groups such as children, women and displaced persons, (b) increase efforts to reform the judicial system, to allocate the human and material resources necessary for the functioning of and independent, impartial and effective justice system in order to implement the recommendations by the national Commission of Enquiry, established in 2008, (c) reinforce dialogue in the context of the 13 August 2007 agreements with a view to ensure they are effectively implemented, (d) intensify efforts ensuring demobilization of all child soldiers, as well as elaborate a plan of action with concrete time period to put an end of the recruitment and employment of child soldiers. 33. Morocco welcomed the amnesty for persons sentenced to death and disarmament. Morocco encouraged Chad to step up its efforts to implement the Commission of Enquiry’s recommendations. Morocco asked about Chad’s expectations of United Nations organizations with regard to strengthening its capacity and implementing institutional measures for the protection of human rights and the rights of refugees, in particular. Morocco recommended that Chad establish a national programme on human rights education and training and call for necessary international assistance in this regard. 34. Sweden recommended that Chad (a) take further measures to prevent parties to the conflict from continuing to recruit children, (b) increase efforts to release and demobilize child fighters and implement measures to ensure their reintegration into society. Sweden expressed concern on sexual violence against women and girls and recommended that Chad (c) implement further measures to tackle the problem of violence against women and combat impunity in this regard. It welcomed the law of 2002 prohibiting female genital mutilation and recommended to (d) implement further measures to stop female genital mutilation altogether. 35. Italy recommended that Chad (a) fully implement the 2002 legislation banning female genital mutilation and enhance awareness raising campaigns so as to combat this practice and other traditions harmful to women’s health and dignity. Referring to the work of the National Commission of Enquiry, which indicated that both rebel groups and Chadian National Armed Forces were responsible for human rights violations during the events of February 2008, Italy recommended that Chad (b) implement without delay all the recommendations formulated by the aforementioned Commission and provide all necessary information on the whereabouts of former opposition leader Ibni Omar Saleh. Italy also recommended to (c) take all necessary measures to bring to bring to an end the use of child soldiers by all parties in armed conflicts in Chad. 36. Turkey encouraged authorities to continue cooperation with MINURCAT and with humanitarian organizations. It recommended stepping up measures to combat enrolment of children by the belligerents, taking into consideration the concerns expressed by the Committee on the Rights of the Child and the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. 37. Nigeria noted that the armed conflict has brought about human right abuses, including sexual violence, recruitment of child soldiers, problems of refugees and internally displaced persons, poverty, illiteracy and ignorance, among others. Nigeria called for the international community (a) to assist Chad addressing these problems; (b) to help it draw up an electoral programme that will be acceptable to all the parties and bring about the realization of peace, democracy and good governance; and (c) to provide the urgently needed technical and financial assistance in support of its efforts and for the implementation of the recommendations that may come out of this review. 38. Burkina Faso noted that Chad ratified international and regional instruments on children and recommended that Chad continue its policy of implementation of international and regional commitments regarding the rights of children. It also invited Chad to continue ratifying different international human rights instruments and to implement them. 39. The United States of America asked about measures taken to demobilize and reintegrate child soldiers and to end their further recruitment by the Chadian National Army and by the Justice and Equality Movement rebel group. It recommended that Chad (a) demonstrate its firm commitment to ending the unlawful use of child soldiers; (b) formally criminalize in domestic law the recruitment and use of child soldiers by non-governmental armed groups, if it has not already done so, and enforce such laws if they already are on the books; and (c) devote resources to and partner with international organizations in prioritizing the reintegration of child soldiers. Secondly, it recommended that the Government (d) bring to justice those responsible for abuses that took place between 28 January and 8 February 2008. Thirdly, it recommended that the Government (e) complete its review and repeal the new press law as soon as possible, as it appeared to go against the Constitution of Chad and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, to which Chad is a party. 40. Tunisia commended Chad’s commitment to human rights which was made clear through the establishment of a National Human Rights Commission in 1994. Tunisia commended the efforts made in the fields of health and education and took note of the determination of the authorities to halt harmful traditional practices which affect the girl child. As a recommendation, it encouraged the Chadian authorities to continue their activities to combat traditional practices which are harmful to health. 41. Denmark recommended that Chad (a) take all necessary steps to implement the recommendation of the Committee on the Rights of the Child to prevent, prohibit and protect the child from all forms of torture or cruel inhuman or degrading treatment. As an important means to prevent and combat torture, Denmark recommended that Chad (b) give ICRC access to all detention facilities, including “Korotoro”. It also recommended that Chad (c) incorporate in national law the definition of torture as contained in article 1 of the Convention against Torture and specifically criminalize torture. 42. Mexico asked for further information on programmes for protection of refugees and IDPs and sensitization campaigns on child soldiers and child exploitation. It recommended that Chad (a) adopt a national action plan for protection of the rights of children and adolescents, (b) consider favourably the visits of Human Rights Council’s Special Procedures mandate holders, in particular those who asked to visit the country, and extend an open-ended and permanent invitation to the special procedures, (c) readopt the moratorium on the death penalty with a view to its total elimination and (d) ratify the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. 43. Canada recommended that Chad (a) step up its efforts to curb the recruitment of child soldiers by armed groups; and (b) establish a national institution to coordinate the reintegration of demobilized child soldiers into Chadian society. Canada recommended (c) that those responsible for crimes against women be prosecuted and that the individual and family code be promulgated and that Chad provide assistance for women who have been victims of sexual violence; (d) that Chad step up its institutional and operational capacity with respect to the administration of justice in order to bring a halt to impunity and to comply with international human rights instruments. Canada also recommended that Chad (e) speedily adopt practical measures for the full implementation of texts governing the media so that journalists can fully engage in their profession, and (f) respect the human rights of internally displaced persons and refugees. 44. Argentina asked for more information on the Commission of Enquiry set up in 2008. Argentina stated that Chad should take into account the new guidelines of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees regarding the protection of IDPs and guarantee the protection of all refugees, in particular vulnerable groups such as children and women at risk. Chad should also give a prompt response to complaints of violations of ICCPR regarding refugees and IDPs and international legislation on trafficking in persons. It recommended that Chad: (a) conduct campaigns for elimination of discrimination against women and (b) consider ratification of the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, (c) ratify the International Convention on the Protection of All Persons from Forced Disappearance and acknowledge the competency of the Committee provided for in the Convention, (d) consider ratification of the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families, the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and its Optional Protocol. 45. Malaysia commended Chad’s cooperation with the Special Procedures of the Human Rights Council. Malaysia recommended (a) to undertake more effective measures to improve the security of women and girls, in particular those who live in the conflict and refugee areas; (b) to increase its cooperation with UNICEF and other United Nations bodies to establish a comprehensive strategy to ensure the protection of women and girls from all forms of violence, particularly sexual violence; and (c) to continue its effort to stop the recruitment and use of children by all parties involved in the conflict in the country and to work closely with the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, UNICEF and other relevant parties to demobilize children from the military and other armed groups. 46. The Democratic Republic of the Congo noted that Chad has made numerous efforts to maintain the country on the path of safeguarding democracy and setting up the rule of law. Special reference should be made regarding legislation on health, education and the fight against corruption. The Democratic Republic of the Congo encouraged Chad to continue its efforts to increase citizens’ awareness of the necessity of female education. It also recommended Chad to put in place, with the support of UNICEF, permanent structures against the exploitation of children as cattle herders. 47. Azerbaijan was encouraged by measures taken by the Chadian Government, including cooperation with UNICEF, to eradicate children forced labour. Azerbaijan recommended Chad (a) to step up its efforts in cooperation with United Nations agencies, namely UNICEF, to combat the recruitment of children into military forces and to reintegrate children released from the army into normal life; (b) to take all possible measures with the assistance of the international community to eradicate illiteracy and to ensure access to education especially for girls and women. It asked for further information on the state of progress of judiciary reforms and on measures taken, including with international assistance, to ensure the right to food, particularly for vulnerable groups. 48. Norway recommended Chad (a) to make it a Government priority to stop impunity for gender-based violence and take immediate and concrete steps to investigate crimes and bring those responsible to justice, (b) to establish a special judicial mechanism within its justice system to investigate allegations of sexual violence by members of all armed groups, including the Chadian army, (c) to publicly support human rights advocacy and create a safe environment for all who promote human rights, (d) ensure that all crimes and violations against human rights defenders and journalists are effectively investigated and prosecuted, and that those responsible are brought to justice. 49. Austria recommended that the Government (a) release underage fighters from its military forces and effectively prosecute persons who are responsible for recruiting children for armed groups, in particular in camps and villages in eastern Chad, criminalize recruitment of children under domestic laws and establish a national institution to coordinate the release and reintegration of released children, as agreed during the visit of the Secretary-General’s Special Representative in May 2008; and (b) take a systematic approach that includes, inter alia, stringent selection processes for and effective supervision of conduct of public officials and judges, as well as human rights training. It also strongly recommended that the Government (c) take measures to ensure the protection of all women from rape and sexual violence, including female genital mutilation. 50. Slovenia recommended that Chad (a) take all necessary legislative and policy measures to address and prevent all forms of violence against children in all settings, including corporal punishment in the family, and strengthen awareness-raising activities; (b) take immediate and adequate measures to ensure that the minimum age for recruitment in military forces is 18, to release underage fighters from its military forces and to facilitate contact between armed groups and the United Nations in order to demobilize and prevent the recruitment of children, particularly the practice of recruitment of children in refugee camps; (c) take all necessary measures to protect all children in internally displaced persons sites and refugee camps; (d) take all measures to address and prevent abduction of children, child trafficking, sexual abuse and exploitation and child labour, including the prosecution of perpetrators of such acts, and to protect and reintegrate child victims. Slovenia also recommended that Chad take all necessary measures (e) to effectively implement the national legislation prohibiting female genital mutilation and (f) to protect women, and especially girls, from sexual violence in the context of armed conflict. 51. Germany cited reports raising the issue of violence against children and asked for further information on the juvenile justice system in Chad. Germany recommended that Chad (a) abolish the state of emergency; (b) prevent military recruitment of children and foster the rights of the child as provided for in the Convention on the Rights of the Child; and (c) reform the judiciary and establish a true separation of powers to ensure democracy and full respect for human rights. 52. Thanking the speakers for the recommendations made which, on the whole, appear acceptable, the delegation asserts that the situation in Chad must be placed in context and that political will is evidenced by the setting-up of the Ministry for Human Rights and the Promotion of Freedoms and by the measures taken by the President of the Republic. 53. Chad’s priority is to safeguard its security and national sovereignty. In this context, human rights must also be safeguarded. The Government wishes to act together with the United Nations system, in particular the Human Rights Council, to ensure a more secure future for children and women. 54. The delegation notes that, during a joint mission with the Representative of the Secretary-General on the human rights of internally displaced persons, UNICEF and the UNHCR, several families housed in UNHCR camps were questioned on the issue of child soldiers. In 2003 and 2004, many parents were in contact with rebel groups, but since 2004 the recruitment of children has stopped completely. A similar situation exists in the camps of displaced persons. The Government can state that, within Chad’s borders, there is no child recruitment at present and that the phenomenon of child soldiers which is prohibited by law, is no longer a reality. Children’s place is with their families and at school; the Government, which is in the process of bringing its legislation into line with the international conventions on the rights of the child, remains vigilant on this issue and stands ready to punish any violation. 55. Another subject which has been raised is the existence of systematic violence, especially sexual violence, against women. The Government has carried out an investigation in the east of the country, where the security situation is most difficult, but it has not found any firm evidence of such incidents. Since independence, and in particular since 1990, several efforts have been made to prevent violence against women and, consequently, impunity has been greatly reduced; nevertheless, the Government continues to work tirelessly on this question. 56. The Government has made specific commitments to bring its laws into line with international treaties. In June 2009, a forum in which several foreign States and international organizations are due to participate will be organized in Chad; it will carry out a comprehensive assessment of the human rights situation in the country and implement a substantial number of pertinent measures. 57. As far as the agreements of 13 August are concerned, in addition to the setting-up of the electoral commission, which has yet to be finalized, the elections will be held with the joint agreement of the Government and the opposition, and after the people of Chad, who will be free to express their political preferences, have been duly informed. 58. Regarding freedom of the press, the delegation notes that, since his appointment in 2005, the Minister for Human Rights has secured the release of all imprisoned journalists and human rights defenders. Neither journalists nor human rights defenders may be imprisoned for having expressed their opinions. The Government remains vigilant in ensuring that there is no violation or abuse in relation to these two categories. 59. In its report, the commission of inquiry on the events of 2 February 2008 refers to many disappearances. The inter-ministerial commission is in the process of conducting an inquiry and any person found responsible will be brought to justice. 60. Finally, concerning the case of Mr. Ibni Omar Saleh, the delegation states that the Government has invested considerable human and material resources in the investigation of this case, that all leads will be followed up and that justice is taking its course. 61. Ireland recommended that Chad: (a) develop a plan of action to prevent the recruitment of child soldiers and to help with demobilization; (b) make further efforts to establish what happened to an opposition leader (Ibni Omar Saleh), ensure that those responsible for his disappearance are prosecuted, follow up on the recommendations of the fact-finding commission and modify the terms of reference and membership to better ensure the independence of the commission; (c) make urgent efforts to ensure humane conditions for detainment in prisons; (d) make further efforts to improve the judicial system as a step towards ensuring the security of IDPs, one of whose priority concerns is to be able to return home. 62. Pakistan noted the strong independent role of the National Commission on Human Rights, the holding of transparent elections and the progressive establishment of judicial and human rights institutions. It recommended that Chad be provided all possible technical and financial assistance by the international community and OHCHR. 63. Egypt commended Chad’s tireless efforts and recommended that it (a) further the promotion and protection of human rights through the consolidations of its domestic human rights institutions with the help of the international community, (b) continue its efforts to promote all universally agreed human rights and fundamental freedoms; (c) continue to resist attempts to enforce any values or standards beyond the universally agreed ones; (d) continue exercising its sovereign right of implementing its penal code in conformity with the universally agreed human rights standards, including the application of the death penalty. 64. The Czech Republic recommended that Chad (a) accede to CAT-OP, establishing its national preventive mechanism accordingly; (b) review conditions in all detention and prison facilities so that they comply with the Standards Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners; and (c) ensure specific human rights training and education for judicial staff and prison officers and ensure their full accountability for any violations. On freedom of expression, it recommended that Chad (d) adopt concrete measures to ensure protection of journalists and human rights defenders against intimidation, death threats and enforced disappearances, and ensure full investigation of any such cases as well as prosecution of their perpetrators. With regard to women, it was recommended (e) that legislation prohibiting female genital mutilation and violence against women be fully implemented, and knowledge of it widely disseminated through awareness-raising campaigns; and (f) that Chad present its report to the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women without further delay. It also recommended (g) to strengthen measures to ensure the strictly humanitarian nature of refugee and IDP camps, to ensure that persons living there are protected against violence, in particular gender-based violence, and forced recruitment, and finally to increase its efforts to find durable solutions for these persons. 65. Spain recommended to Chad to (a) take decisive actions to ensure immediate protection for civilians at risk and propose to the armed opposition a viable mechanism to meet its needs without the use of weapons; (b) put an end to impunity, investigate crimes and bring perpetrators to trial; (c) prescribe female genital mutilation as an offence, in addition to its present prohibition by law, and take effective measures to eradicate it; (d) declare a new moratorium with a view to ensuring definitive abolition of the death penalty; (e) take immediate actions to establish a minimum age of 18 for recruitment and ensure that those still fighting are demobilized, and take measures to prevent recruitment of minors in refugee camps. 66. South Africa was particularly concerned about the high incidence of rape and sexual violence of women and girls, including among internally displaced persons. It asked questions, inter alia, on measures taken to address gender violence and increase girls’ enrolment in schools and on impunity and corruption, particularly within the police and military. It encouraged Chad to continue its efforts aimed at, inter alia, the restoration of peace and security, the reform of the judicial system and the implementation of the National Programme of Action for children. 67. The Congo asked for information on the representation of women in State institutions. It recommended (a) that Chad ratify pertinent conventions and proceed with the harmonization of national legislation; (b) that the international community provide the necessary assistance, in accordance with Chad’s enormous needs. 68. Djibouti commended the Government of Chad for its devotion to the principles of human rights as defined in the international, regional and subregional instruments. Djibouti requested the international community to extend a wide range of support to the Government of Chad, helping it to fulfil its commitments. 69. Gabon encouraged Chad to promote literacy and strengthen existing legislation in view of ensuring free primary and secondary education. It recommended that Chad multiply its actions with the view to reinforcing legislation in the domain of human rights. 70. Guinea stated that despite the burden of the past and the present geopolitical constraints, Chad has been carrying on the long process of the promotion of human rights. Therefore, Guinea called upon the Human Rights Council, OHCHR and the international community to support and accompany Chad’s efforts for lasting peace. 71. Ghana asked for information on measures aiming to eliminate discriminatory practices against women and girls. It recommended that Chad endeavour to adopt readily workable measures aimed at improving the capacity of its institutions to fully address the sociocultural impediments to the promotion and protection of human rights. 72. China encouraged the Government of Chad to continue the formulation of a national programme of action on the protection of children, its judicial reform and the human rights education of its citizens, especially military and law enforcement personnel. China encouraged Chad to take measures to readjust its domestic law in line with the international human rights conventions it has acceded to and to seek international cooperation to improve the livelihood of its people. China urged the international community to show full understanding of the difficulties encountered by the Chadian Government and provide all forms of assistance and technical support to help the Chadian Government to improve its ability to protect human rights. 73. Senegal encouraged Chad to increase efforts to incorporate in a more effective way international treaties into national legislation and with a view to better protection of children from vulnerable groups, as pointed out by the Committee on the Rights of the Child. Senegal also invited Chad to explore further all the possibilities for cooperation with the mechanisms for protection of human rights, including with the special procedures of the Human Rights Council. 74. Latvia welcomed the ratification of, inter alia, the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court. It was pleased to note that Chad is prepared to extend a standing invitation to special procedures of the Human Rights Council and recommended the Government to take the necessary actions to implement this commitment. 75. Cameroon welcomed the untiring efforts made to strengthen peace, rule of law, democracy, collective and individual freedoms and the determined search for material welfare in accordance with the MDGs. Cameroon hoped that the United Nations family would mobilize further to help Chad both materially and financially, so that it can further promote human rights and freedoms. 76. Bangladesh noted, inter alia, the establishment of the National Human Rights Commission in the early 1990s. It recommended to (a) enlist the support of the international community to resolve the internal and cross-border conflicts that continue to undermine its national security; (b) remain engaged with UNHCR and other relevant international organizations to seek a comprehensive and durable solution to the refugee and IDP situations within its territory; and (c) accelerate the demobilization of child combatants and ensure their proper rehabilitation with the support of the international community. 77. Angola recommended that Chad (a) strengthen awareness activities in all settings and adopt appropriate legislative and policy measures to address and prevent violence against children and to reintegrate ex child soldiers in society in accordance with the Convention on the Rights of the Child; (b) take all measures to ensure the protection of children from trafficking and bring perpetrators of child trafficking to justice, (c) strengthen policies to promote education and to address educational gender imbalances; (d) reinforce strategies to achieve poverty reduction targets. 78. Equatorial Guinea welcomed, inter alia, the adoption of laws to protect the rights of persons living with HIV/AIDS and persons with disabilities. It recognized the measures taken by Chad to address forced labour and asked what further steps were being taken to address the plight of child cowherders. It also acknowledged, inter alia, initiatives to protect the rights of refugees and internally displaced persons. It encouraged Chad to remain committed to the protection and promotion of human rights and to stay constructively engaged with the international community in this regard. 79. The United Arab Emirates commended Chad for incorporating international human rights principles in its constitution and for ratifying a number of international and regional human rights instruments. It welcomed the efforts of the Government to promote the right to education, which is guaranteed by the Constitution, and requested further explanations about the national committee to combat illiteracy, its activities and achievements. 80. Japan recommended that Chad (a) ensure revisions to the Electoral Code that meet internationally recognized democratic standards and hold the parliamentary elections that have been postponed since 2006 as soon as possible in a manner that guarantees the political rights of its citizens; (b) implement measures to improve the human rights situation of refugees and internally displaced persons and safety on the ground by enhancing the capabilities of the Chadian security unit (DIS) and coordination among MINURCAT, United Nations human rights bodies and NGOs in order to prevent the militarization of refugee camps and violence against aid workers; and (c) redouble its efforts under the project to reform the educational system, including by redressing the gap in school attendance between males and females working to effectively guarantee the rights of women and girls in the field of education by addressing societal and cultural constraints. 81. The Central African Republic pointed out that the war of Darfur could not be used as grounds for denying the efforts made by Government of Chad in human rights. This is an opportunity to call for the assistance of the international community to help this brother country solve the crisis it is going through. It recommended the strengthening of the technical capacity and human institutional capacity in order to consolidate the efforts being made by the country with a view to the promotion and protection of human rights. II. 	Conclusions and/or recommendations 82. The recommendations formulated during the interactive dialogue have been examined by Chad and the recommendations listed below enjoy the support of Chad: 1. 	Ratify the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide (Brazil); 2. 	Accede to the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (CAT.OP), establishing its national preventive mechanism accordingly (Czech Republic); 3. 	Sign and ratify CAT-OP (United Kingdom, Argentina); 4. 	Ratify the International Convention on the Protection of All Persons from Forced Disappearance (France, Argentina); acknowledge the competency of the Committee provided for in the International Convention on the Protection of All Persons from Forced Disappearance (Argentina); 5. 	Ratify the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (Mexico, Argentina); 6. 	Consider ratification of the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women, the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families and the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and its Optional Protocol (Argentina); 7. 	Ratify pertinent conventions, and proceed with harmonization of national legislation (Republic of the Congo); multiply actions aimed at reinforcing legislation in the domain of human rights (Gabon); 8. 	Reinforce the capacities of the Ministry of Human Rights and of the Promotion of Liberty; energize the National Commission on Human Rights; harmonize national legislation with international human rights instruments (Côte d’Ivoire); 9. 	Continue its policy of implementation of international and regional commitments regarding the rights of children (Burkina Faso); 10. 	Adopt a national action plan for protection of the rights of children and adolescents (Mexico); 11. 	Publicly support human rights advocacy and create a safe environment for all who promote human rights (Norway); 12. 	Establish a national programme of human rights education and training and call for necessary international assistance in this regard (Morocco); 13. 	Continue its efforts to promote all universally agreed human rights and fundamental freedoms, and continue to resist attempts to enforce any values or standards beyond the universally agreed ones (Egypt); 14. 	Endeavour to adopt readily workable measures aimed at improving the capacity of its institutions to fully address the sociocultural impediments to the promotion and protection of human rights (Ghana); 15. 	Strengthen awareness activities in all settings and adopt appropriate legislative and policy measures to address and prevent violence against children and to reintegrate former child soldiers in society in accordance with the Convention on the Rights of the Child (Angola); 16. 	Reinforce strategies to achieve poverty reduction targets (Angola); 17. 	Present its report to CEDAW without further delay (Czech Republic); 18. 	Take necessary actions to implement the commitment to extend a standing invitation to special procedures of the Human Rights Council (Latvia); 19. 	Continue to consider favourably the visits of Human Rights Council special procedure mandate holders, in particular those who asked to visit the country; consider extending an open-ended and permanent invitation to the special procedures (Mexico); 20. 	Invite the Special Rapporteur on extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions to visit the country (United Kingdom); 21. 	Review possible discriminatory laws from its legislation, with a view to guaranteeing the effective promotion and protection of the rights of vulnerable groups, such as women and children (Brazil); 22. 	Take all necessary steps to implement the Committee on the Rights of the Child recommendation to prevent, prohibit and protect the child from all forms of torture or cruel inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment (Denmark); 23. 	Incorporate in national law the definition of torture as contained in article 1 of the Convention against Torture and specifically criminalize torture (Denmark); 24. 	Review conditions in all detention and prison facilities so that they comply with the Standards Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners (Czech Republic); 25. 	Implement further measures to tackle the problem of violence against women and combat impunity in this regard (Sweden); 26. 	Conduct campaigns for the elimination of discrimination against women (Argentina); 27. 	Implement further measures to stop female genital mutilation altogether. (Sweden); 28. 	Take all necessary measures to effectively implement the national legislation prohibiting female genital mutilation (Slovenia); 29. 	Prescribe female genital mutilation as an offence, in addition to its present prohibition by law, and take effective measures to eradicate it (Spain); 30. 	Fully implement the 2002 legislation banning female genital mutilation and enhance awareness-raising campaigns so as to combat this practice and other traditions harmful to women’s health and dignity (Italy); 31. 	Take all necessary measures to protect women, and especially girls, from sexual violence in the context of armed conflict (Slovenia); 32. 	Undertake more effective measures to improve the security of women and girls, in particular those who live in the conflict and refugee areas (Malaysia); 33. 	Increase its cooperation with UNICEF and other United Nations bodies to establish a comprehensive strategy to ensure the protection of women and girls from all forms of violence, particularly sexual violence (Malaysia); 34. 	Take measures to ensure the protection of all women from rape and sexual violence, including female genital mutilation (Austria); 35. 	Fully implement legislation, prohibiting female genital mutilation and violence against women and widely disseminate knowledge of it through awareness raising campaigns (Czech Republic); 36. 	Continue activities to combat traditional practices which are harmful to health (Tunisia); 37. 	Take all necessary legislative and policy measures to address and prevent all forms of violence against children in all settings, including corporal punishment, and to strengthen the awareness-raising activities (Slovenia); 38. 	Take all measures to address and prevent abduction of children, child trafficking, sexual abuse and exploitation and child labour, including the prosecution of perpetrators of such acts, and to protect and reintegrate child victims (Slovenia); 39. 	Take all measures to ensure the protection of children from trafficking and bring perpetrators of child trafficking to justice (Angola); 40. 	Put in place, with the support of UNICEF, permanent structures against the exploitation of children as cattle herders (Democratic Republic of the Congo); 41. 	Increase efforts to release and demobilize child fighters and implement measures to ensure their reintegration into society (Sweden); 42. 	Intensify efforts ensuring demobilisation of all child soldiers, as well as to elaborate a plan of action with concrete time period to put an end to the recruitment and employment of child soldiers (Switzerland); 43. 	Continue its efforts to stop the recruitment and use of children by all parties involved in the conflict in the country and work closely with OHCA, UNICEF and other relevant parties to demobilize children from the military and other armed groups (Malaysia); 44. 	Step up measures to combat enrolment of children by the belligerents, taking into consideration the concerns expressed by the Committee on the Rights of the Child and the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (Turkey); 45. 	Continue its efforts, if necessary, in cooperation with United Nations agencies, namely UNICEF to combat the recruitment of children into military forces and to reintegrate children released from the army into normal life (Azerbaijan); 46. 	Develop in good time an action plan to prevent the illegal recruitment of children into its forces and establish transparent procedures for the verification and release of children from the Chadian army. (United Kingdom); Develop a plan of action to prevent the recruitment of child soldiers and to help with demobilization (Ireland); 47. 	Release underage fighters from its military forces and effectively prosecute persons who are responsible for recruiting children for armed groups, in particular in camps and villages in Eastern Chad, criminalize recruitment of children under domestic laws and establish a national institution to coordinate the release and reintegration of released children, as agreed during the visit of the Secretary-General’s Special Representative in May 2008 (Austria); 48. 	Prevent military recruitment of children and foster the rights of the child as provided for in the Convention on the Rights of the Child (Germany); 49. 	Put an end to impunity, investigate crimes, and bring perpetrators to trials (Spain); End impunity for personnel in uniform (France); 50. 	Ensure due process to all detainees (Netherlands); 51. 	Maintain records for all persons detained by the security forces (Netherlands); 52. 	Make urgent efforts to ensure humane conditions for detainment in prisons. (Ireland); 53. 	Implement the recommendation of the Commission of Enquiry regarding the events of February 2008 (France); 54. 	Implement without delay all the recommendations formulated by the National Commission of Enquiry, established on 2 April 2008, and provide all necessary information on the whereabouts of a former opposition leader (Italy); 55. 	Make further efforts to establish what happened to an opposition leader; those responsible for his disappearance to be prosecuted; to follow up on the recommendations of the fact-finding commission; and to modify the terms of reference and membership to ensure better the independence of the commission (Ireland); 56. 	Bring to justice those responsible for abuses that took place between 28 January and 8 February 2008 (United States of America); 57. 	Increase efforts to reform the judicial system, to allocate the necessary human and material resources necessary for the functioning of independent, impartial and effective justice system in order to implement the recommendations by the national Commission of investigations, established in 2008 (Switzerland); 58. 	Continue efforts for the reinforcement of the Rule of Law, the respect and the actual implementation of human rights throughout the country, in particular through the completion of the existing reform process in the field of justice, territorial administration, the civil registry, the Civil Code and the Family Code (Algeria); 59. 	Give high priority to the adoption of practical measures for the full implementation of texts governing the media in Chad so that journalists can fully exercise their profession (Canada); 60. 	Take measures to establish new legislative framework, ensuring freedom of the press (France); 61. 	Reinforce dialogue in the context of the 13 August 2007 agreements with a view to ensure they are effectively implemented (Switzerland); 62. 	Continue its efforts and initiatives to spread education (Saudi Arabia); 63. 	Strengthen policies to promote education and address educational gender imbalances (Angola); 64. 	Continue its efforts to ensure education for all children and to proceed, with the support and the assistance of the international community, to the necessary arrangements for the improvement of its educational system (Algeria); 65. 	Continue its efforts, in light of the rights to non-discrimination and equality between men and women, to increase citizens’ awareness of the necessity of female education (Democratic Republic of the Congo); 66. 	Ensure that, in practice, girls have equal access to education (Netherlands); 67. 	Take all possible measures with the assistance of the international community to eradicate illiteracy and to ensure access to education especially for girls and women (Azerbaijan); 68. 	Redouble its efforts under the project to reform the educational system, including by redressing the gap in school attendance between males and females working to effectively guarantee the rights of women and girls in the field of education by addressing societal and cultural constraints (Japan); 69. 	Continue to take all necessary measures to protect all children in internally displaced persons sites and refugee camps (Slovenia); 70. 	Make further efforts to improve judicial system as a step towards ensuring the security of IDPs, one of whose priority concerns is to be able to return home (Ireland); 71. 	Call for all possible technical and financial assistance, it needs, by the international community as well as the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights (Pakistan); 72. 	Call for the support of the international community to assist it in addressing the challenge of armed conflict with its rebel armed groups, which has brought about human right abuses, including sexual violence, recruitment of child soldiers, problems of refugees and internally displaced persons, poverty illiteracy and ignorance among others (Nigeria); 73. 	Call for the support of the international community to assist it in drawing up an electoral programme that will be acceptable to all the parties and bring about the realization of peace, democracy and good governance (Nigeria); 74. 	Call for the support of the international community to provide the urgently needed technical and financial assistance in support of its efforts and for the implementation of the recommendations that may come out of this review (Nigeria); 75. 	In the framework of the human rights forum, include training and awareness programmes on human rights and international treaties to the benefit of relevant officers, including through United Nations technical assistance projects (Algeria); 76. 	Enlist the support of the international community to resolve the internal and cross-border conflicts that continue to undermine its national security (Bangladesh); 77. 	Remain engaged with the UNHCR and other relevant international organizations to seek a comprehensive and durable solution to the refugee and IDP situations within its territory (Bangladesh); 78. 	Accelerate the demobilization of child combatants and ensure their proper rehabilitation with the support of the international community (Bangladesh); 79. 	Remain committed to the protection and promotion of human rights and stay constructively engaged with the international community in this regard. (Equatorial Guinea); Further the promotion and protection of human rights through the consolidation of its domestic human rights institutions with the help of the international community (Egypt); 80. 	Request the international community to provide appropriate assistance, enabling Chad to achieve the objectives envisaged in paragraph 89 of its national report (Mali); 81. 	Appeal to the international community to provide necessary assistance, in accordance with Chad’s enormous needs (Republic of the Congo); 82. 	Strengthen the technical and the human institutional capacity in order to consolidate the efforts being made by Chad with a view to the promotion and protection of human rights (Central African Republic); 83. 	Step up efforts to stop and to prevent that parties to the conflict continue to recruit children (Sweden, Canada, Italy); 84. 	Formally criminalize in domestic law the recruitment and use of child soldiers by non-governmental armed groups, if it has not already done so, and enforce such laws if they already are on the books and devote resources to and partner with international organizations to prioritize the reintegration of child soldiers (United States of America); 85. 	Guarantee that officials responsible for acts of arbitrary arrest, extrajudicial execution and excessive use of force, torture and rape are brought to justice (Netherlands); 86. 	As soon as possible complete its review and repeal the new press law as it appeared to go against the Chadian Constitution and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, to which Chad is a party. (United States). 83. The following recommendations will be examined by Chad which will provide responses in due time. The response of Chad to these recommendations will be included in the outcome report adopted by the Human Rights Council at its twelfth session: 1. 	Ensure that appropriate penalties are applied for acts such as female genital mutilation, forced marriages and sexual violence (Netherlands); 2. 	Amend existing legislation so as to ensure equal succession and inheritance rights for women (Netherlands); 3. 	Readopt the moratorium on death penalty with a view of its total elimination. (Mexico); Declare new moratorium with a view to ensure definitive abolition of the death penalty (Spain); 4. 	Take all possible measures to ensure protection of civilians, in particular vulnerable groups such as children, women and displaced persons (Switzerland); 5. 	Take decisive actions to ensure immediate protection for civilians at risk and to propose to the armed opposition a viable mechanism to meet its needs without the use of weapons. (Spain); Take concrete and resolved measures to offer immediate protection to civilians, and to propose to armed opposition a viable mechanism for a national dialogue conducive to bringing peace and serenity back to the whole country (Côte d’Ivoire); 6. 	Give the International Committee of the Red Cross access to all detention facilities including to “Korotoro” (Denmark); 7. 	Prosecute those responsible for crimes against women, promulgate the individual and family code and provide assistance for women who have been victims of sexual violence (Canada); 8. 	Intensify its efforts and reinforce all institutions and mechanisms concerned with the reintegration of demobilized child soldiers into Chadian society (Canada); 9. 	Make it a government priority to stop impunity for gender-based violence and to take immediate and concrete steps to investigate crimes and bring those responsible to justice (Norway); 10. 	Take steps to strengthen the criminal justice system and, in addition, cooperate fully with MINURCAT’s efforts in this area (United Kingdom); 11. 	Step up its institutional and operational capacity with respect to the administration of justice in order to bring a halt to impunity and to comply with international human rights instruments (Canada); 12. 	Ensure specific human rights training and education for judicial staff and prison officers and ensure their full accountability for any violation (Czech Republic); 13. 	Continue exercising its sovereign right of implementing its penal code in conformity with the universally agreed human rights standards, including the application of the death penalty (Egypt); 14. 	Implement measures to improve the human rights situation of refugees and internally displaced persons and safety on the ground by enhancing the capabilities of the Chadian security unit (DIS) and coordination among the United Nations Mission in the Central African Republic and Chad (MINURCAT), United Nations human rights bodies, and NGOs in order to prevent the militarization of refugee camps and violence against aid workers (Japan). 84. The recommendations noted in the report in paragraph 24 (c), 43 (f), 48 (b) (d), 49 (b), 50 (b), 51 (a) (c), 64 (d) (g), 65 (e), 80 (a) above did not enjoy the support of Chad. 85. All conclusions and/or recommendations contained in the present report reflect the position of the submitting State(s) and /or the State under review thereon. They should not be construed as endorsed by the Working Group as a whole. Annex Composition of the delegation La délégation du Tchad était dirigée par S.E M. Abderaman Djasnabaille, Ministre chargé des droits de l’Homme et de la promotion des libertés; et était composée de: M. Samir Adam Annour, Conseiller aux Affaires Administratives, Juridiques et aux Droits de l’Homme de la Présidence; M. Ahmat Mahamat Hassan, Conseiller aux Affaires Juridiques et aux Droits de l’Homme du Cabinet du Premier Ministre; M. Djimet Arabi, Secrétaire General du Ministre Chargé des Droits de l’Homme et de la Promotion des Libertés; M. Domaye Nodjigoto, Secrétaire General du Ministère de la Justice et Président de la Commission Nationale des Droit de l’Homme (CNDH); M. Rotta Dingamadji Carlos, Directeur des Etudes de la Législation et du Contentieux Membre du Comite de Suivi; M. Gaien Barka, Directeur des Affaires Juridiques et de la Documentation du Ministère des Relations Extérieures; M. Baba Djaoura Ndotti, Directeur des Droits Civils et Politiques Membre du Comite de Suivi; S.E. Mr. Bamaga Abbas Malloum, Ambassadeur Représentant Permanent du Tchad a Genève; Mr. Awada Angui, Premier Conseiller de la Mission Permanente du Tchad a Genève. 