Distr.: General 4 January 2010 English Original: English/French General Assembly Human Rights Council Thirteenth session Agenda item 6 Universal Periodic Review Report of the Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review* Côte d’Ivoire * Previously issued under document symbol A/HRC/WG.6/6/L.8. The annex to the present report is circulated as received. Contents 
Paragraphs Page Introduction............................................................................................................. 1–4 3 
I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process................................................ 5–98 3 
A. Presentation by the State under review........................................................... 5–22 3 
B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review........................ 23–98 5 
II. Conclusions and/or recommendations .................................................................... 99–102 13  Annex Composition of the delegation ......................................................................................................... 24 Introduction 1. The Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review, established in accordance with Human Rights Council resolution 5/1 of 18 June 2007, held its sixth session from 30 November to 11 December 2009. The review of Côte d’Ivoire was held at the 8th meeting, on 3 December 2009. The delegation of Côte d’Ivoire was headed by Mr. Tia Koné, President of the Supreme Court. At its 12th meeting, held on 7 December 2009, the Working Group adopted the present report on Côte d’Ivoire. 2. On 7 September 2009, the Human Rights Council selected the following group of rapporteurs (troika) to facilitate the review of Côte d’Ivoire: Bolivia, Ghana and Slovakia. 3. In accordance with paragraph 15 of the annex to resolution 5/1, the following documents were issued for the review of Côte d’Ivoire: (a) A national report submitted/written presentation made in accordance with paragraph 15 (a) (A/HRC/WG.6/6/CIV/1); (b) A compilation prepared by the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) in accordance with paragraph 15 (b) (A/HRC/WG.6/6/CIV/2); (c) A summary prepared by OHCHR in accordance with paragraph 15 (c) (A/HRC/WG.6/6/CIV/3).  4. A list of questions prepared in advance by Germany, Sweden, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Argentina, the Czech Republic, Slovakia and Latvia was transmitted to Côte d’Ivoire through the troika. These questions are available on the extranet of the Working Group. I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process A. Presentation by the State under review 5. At the 8th meeting, held on 3 December 2009, Mr. Tia Koné, President of the Supreme Court of Côte d’Ivoire, introduced the national report, which had been the subject of an information campaign with special emphasis on the role of civil society organizations. 6. The delegation drew attention to the difficult situation in Côte d’Ivoire, the result of 10 years of political and military crisis. Côte d’Ivoire was hoping that a solution would finally be reached under the Ouagadougou Political Agreement. The crisis had left the national territory divided, the authority of the State weakened and the human rights situation worse than before. 7. The State had nevertheless not renounced its international obligations, notwithstanding its right to suspend the exercise of rights and freedoms in accordance with the spirit and letter of the international instruments to which it was party. It had continued to nurture the process of democratization and consolidation of the principles of the rule of law. 8. The delegation recalled the legal and institutional framework of Côte d’Ivoire, in particular the Constitution, which devoted 22 articles to human rights, and the legislation that enabled citizens to invoke those articles directly. The Ivorian State was aware that more needed to be done to bring domestic law and its implementation into line with the international instruments it had ratified. 9. Côte d’Ivoire had made commitments at the subregional level (Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS)) and the regional level (African Union), and in the framework of the International Organization of la Francophonie, and had ensured it had the resources needed to fulfil its international human rights obligations.  10. Under the Ivorian legal system, the separation of powers was constitutionally guaranteed and judicial independence recognized. The judiciary had undergone a series of reforms to improve its operation. The Ivorian political system of protection was a combination of classical and modern mechanisms. Parliament’s role as overall guarantor of freedoms had been consolidated through the effective exercise of its legislative and executive oversight functions. 11. The executive had created special ministries to promote human rights, namely the Ministry to Combat AIDS, the Ministry for Solidarity and War Victims, the Ministry of the Family, Women and Social Affairs, and the Ministry of Justice and Human Rights. Additional mechanisms had recently been created, such as the Office of the Ombudsman and the National Human Rights Commission. Political parties, the media, NGOs (over 200 human rights organizations) and trade unions were other actors helping to protect and promote human rights. 12. With regard to fair trial, the Government had taken steps to strengthen the independence of the judiciary. As to prison conditions, overcrowding and the frequency of escapes had prompted the Government to amend the Code of Criminal Procedure so that first-time offenders were no longer placed in pretrial detention and the periods of pretrial detention were reduced. 13. In order to guarantee the right of everyone to take part in public life, the Government had made special arrangements to enable every Ivorian, free of charge, to obtain a birth certificate and a national identity card, and to be registered on the electoral rolls. The President had authorized all the signatories to the Linas-Marcoussis Agreement to stand in the next presidential elections. 14. Côte d’Ivoire had taken steps to curb human rights violations attributable to the defence and security forces and had instituted proceedings against those concerned. The delegation confirmed that the amnesty laws and the presidential pardons granted in the course of political negotiations did not apply to the perpetrators of serious human rights violations. Once the crisis was over, the Ivorian State intended to take a proactive approach to consolidating the rule of law. 15. The Ivorian State was continually investing in economic, social and cultural rights. The priority given to education and training was illustrated by its work on educational infrastructure, the registration of schools in the regions and the creation of an educational system commensurate with the resources available. 16. In the area of health, Côte d’Ivoire had adopted a National Health Development Plan for 2009–2013. Health programmes and projects for the major transmissible and non-transmissible diseases had been introduced. 17. Government action on the environment included the creation of a Ministry of the Environment and a Ministry of Urban Waste Management, and the establishment of monitoring and research mechanisms. 18. Sectoral rights were a particular concern of the Ivorian State. Women received special protection: the law prohibited not only all forms of sex discrimination in access to employment but also all forms of violence against women, including female genital mutilation. In addition, a directorate of the Ministry of the Family, Women and Social Affairs had been set up in 2006 to monitor sexual equity and equality and other similar measures. 19. Children’s rights remained one of the Government’s chief concerns, and numerous strategic measures had been put in place to combat abuse of all kinds, particularly child trafficking and smuggling. 20. In accordance with the instruments ratified by Côte d’Ivoire, numerous legal provisions had been adopted for the protection and social advancement of persons with disabilities, notably in respect of employment. 21. Government action focused also on persons displaced as a result of the political and military crises since 1999. A Ministry for Solidarity and War Victims had been created, a bill on compensation for war victims had been drafted and other measures had been taken in cooperation with national and international partners. 22. Côte d’Ivoire was aware that a successful solution to the crisis would depend on an open, transparent and fair electoral process, and called on the international community to support the Integrated Command Centre. Côte d’Ivoire also intended to honour its commitment to submit periodic reports to the treaty bodies. B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review 23. During the interactive dialogue, 54 delegations made statements. Recommendations made during the interactive dialogue are to be found in section II of the present report. 24. Cuba noted that Côte d’Ivoire was a developing country facing difficulties, especially with the global economic crisis. It highlighted the National Health Development Plan and programmes and projects covering various priority diseases. It noted attention given to maternal mortality, immunization coverage and fight against malaria and HIV/AIDS. It noted the importance given to children’s social development, including the fight against trafficking and child exploitation. It made recommendations. 25. Canada congratulated Côte d’Ivoire for progresses made since the Ouagadougou Political Agreement. It encouraged the fulfilment of commitments made to end the crisis, starting with free and transparent elections. It noted the crisis had eroded rule of law and state services and structures, corruption had infested the administration, and criminalization of security forces had generated racketeering and violence. It noted that interethnic violence originated from land disputes and that contradiction between the Ivorian nationality code and sub-regional citizenship laws resulted in statelessness cases. It congratulated accomplishments made in women’s rights and in the fight against trafficking of children. Canada made recommendations. 26. Belgium asked what measures, in line with Security Council resolution 1865, Côte d’Ivoire implemented to prevent sexual violence and to prosecute persons suspected of such acts. It asked whether Côte d’Ivoire would allow the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court to visit the country and to conduct investigations. It asked whether civil society had been consulted in the preparation of the national report. Belgium made recommendations. 27. The United Kingdom welcomed the progress made against a very difficult situation and noted that many challenges remained. It expressed its concern about the precarious human rights situation and about sexual and gender-based violence which is perpetrated on a significant scale. It further noted that impunity continues to underpin many breaches of human rights and stressed that more can be done to combat impunity. The United Kingdom made recommendations. 28. The Netherlands noted efforts made to improve prisons’ conditions, highlighted problems such as overcrowding, malnutrition, shortage of medical care, lack of sanitary facilities and lack of separation between juveniles and adults in prisons. It expressed concern about reports of torture and inhuman and degrading treatment of detainees. It indicated that the National Human Rights Commission failed to comply with the Paris Principles and that a high number of the population remained de facto or de jure stateless. The Netherlands made recommendations. 29. Belarus welcomed legal reforms relating to justice, family law and racial discrimination and the 2008 Presidential Decree relating to recommendations of the Special Rapporteur on contemporary forms of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance further to his visit, in 2004. It also appreciated the adoption of the 2008 national plan of action to implement the Security Council resolution on upholding women’s rights in situations of conflict as well as the plan of action to combat trafficking of children and child labour. Belarus made recommendations. 30. France referred to concerns expressed by the United Nations Secretary General over violence and sexual abuse against women in the country. It noted the practice of female genital mutilations, due to a lack of appropriate policies. It asked about measures to prosecute offenders and provide assistance to the victims. It expressed concern about trafficking and child labour and welcomed the commitment to eradicate it with the assistance of ILO and UNICEF. It enquired about measures taken to implement the 2008 law against racism, xenophobia, tribalism, and racial and religious discriminations. France made recommendations. 31. Brazil congratulated the Government for measures taken, such as the abolition of the death penalty, the creation of the Ministry for Solidarity and War Victims, the implementation of a strategy against child labour and child trafficking. It also noted the efforts to identify and register over 6.5 million Ivorians on electoral lists. It expressed concern about food insecurity, racial discrimination, the situation of internally displaced persons, sexual violence, and about the situation of the most vulnerable groups. Brazil made recommendations. 32. Algeria welcomed the efforts made by Côte d’Ivoire to consolidate peace and stability through the Ouagadougou Political Agreement. It noted positively the open cooperation with the international community to strengthen the judicial system. It saluted the efforts made to improve the situation of children, notably mechanisms to fight smuggling and trafficking of children and to provide support to orphans, traumatized and poor children. Algeria made recommendations. 33. Ireland congratulated the Government of Côte d’Ivoire for progresses made, particularly the recent decree on human rights education in schools. Ireland made recommendations. 34. Austria welcomed the ratification of core human rights conventions and the planned ratification of the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC) on the involvement of children in armed conflict. Considering the consequences of the current armed conflict, Austria recalled that returning to normality depends on ending impunity and asked for information on the re-establishment of civil administration in the North as foreseen by the Ouagadougou Agreement. While welcoming the adoption of laws relating to women rights, particularly the prohibition of female genital mutilation, Austria remained concerned about sexual violence against women and children. Austria made recommendations. 35. The Czech Republic welcomed the efforts undertaken by the Government against child trafficking and made recommendations. 36. Germany referred to frequent instances of persistent impunity regarding human rights violations committed by law enforcement officials. It further noted that the lack of progress in redeploying judicial police and corrections officers in particular continued to adversely affect efforts to restore the rule of law and to address impunity. Germany asked how the Government planned to address these issues. Referring to the human rights of internally displaced persons and the crisis stemming from an inadequate response to their needs. Germany inquired how the Government planned to address the problems faced by the displaced. Germany made recommendations. 37. Italy noted a growing culture of impunity despite improvements in the general human rights situation. It stressed the need for a greater transparency and efficiency in the judicial system. Italy noted that child labour remains a challenge, particularly in large agricultural plantations, which have an increasing tendency to employ minors. Italy asked about the measures taken in this regard and made recommendations. 38. The Republic of the Congo saluted the reform of the criminal procedure which reduces the length of pre-trial detention and addresses prisons’ overcrowding. It was convinced that the Ouagadougou Agreement contributed to the consolidation of the rule of law. It encouraged Côte d’Ivoire to consolidate the political, diplomatic, economic and social progress made in recent years. It made one recommendation. 39. Chile welcomed the information provided which showed progress in human rights despite existing difficulties and formulated recommendations. 40. Turkey noted the significant progress in areas such as the redeployment of the administration, disarmament, the reunification of the army, and the implementation process of enrolment and identification of voters. It also applauded the Ivorian constitution which indicates progress in protecting human rights. Turkey expressed hope that those who committed violence against women and children since the beginning of the armed conflict will be prosecuted. 41. The Holy See noted that the human rights situation has improved since 2004 but remained concerned about the culture of impunity, which constitutes a challenge for human rights promotion and protection. The Holy See asked about the National Plan to combat sexual violence. While referring to the education system, which is deeply disturbed by violence, aggression, extortion of money and other human rights abuses by the Fédération estudiantine et scolaire de Côte d`Ivoire, the Holy See inquired how the government planned to control the organisation and which sanctions were taken so far against it. It made recommendations. 42. Spain recognized progress towards democratization and welcomed the decision to ratify the second protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights aimed at abolishing death penalty. Spain considered that the implementation of the Agreement and its complementary agreements was fundamental. It made recommendations. 43. India noted that the Ouagadougou Agreement had resulted in some successes, including the redeployment of Government agencies, disarmament, a campaign against impunity, rule of law enforcement and administrative reforms. India took note of the 2000 Constitution, with articles dealing with human rights, and the National Human Rights Commission and encouraged ensuring its compliance with the Paris Principles. It noted that Côte d’Ivoire was party to almost all principal international and regional human rights instruments and urged considering ratifying the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD) and both Optional Protocols to CRC. It noted the National Health Development Plan, addressing maternal mortality, immunization coverage and HIV/AIDS. It noted progress made regarding voter registration and identification and hoped for early elections. 44. Replying to the questions put during the dialogue, the head of delegation said that there had been an upsurge in sexual violence since the beginning of the war. Such acts were punished in accordance with the Constitution and the law and cases were prosecuted in the courts. While that had not presented a problem in the government zone, prosecutions had not been possible in the ex-rebel centre-north-west (CNO) zone for lack of courts, but proceedings would be taken once reunification was complete. 45. On the question of statelessness, the delegation said, inter alia, that the Nationality Code applied the principle of jus sanguinis. 46. Female genital mutilation was a punishable offence under the agreements signed by Côte d’Ivoire and under the Constitution. In addition, efforts were being made to raise public awareness of the issue of excision. 47. With regard to trafficking in children in plantations and agriculture, the delegation recalled that Côte d’Ivoire had signed bilateral and multilateral instruments with States and international organizations in order to put a stop to illegal trafficking. 48. The Rural Land Act had been the subject of an extensive information campaign prior to adoption, and had been amended to allow foreigners to own land. Women had access to land and nothing in the law prohibited that access. 49. Justice was organized as a pyramidal structure. The reforms mentioned in the national report maintained that structure in order to allow all inhabitants of Côte d’Ivoire equal access to justice. The independence of the judiciary was guaranteed by the Constitution and the law. 50. Azerbaijan welcomed the establishment of the National Human Rights Commission. It expressed concern at sexual violence against children, which remained prevalent according to the Secretary- General, particularly where law enforcement is weak. It asked if the Government considered being a party to the 1961 Convention on the Reduction of Statelessness and the 1954 Convention relating to the Status of Stateless Persons and if legislation prohibited corporal punishment of children in all settings. Azerbaijan made recommendations. 51. The Russian Federation welcomed the progress made in improving stability and implementing the peace process foreseen by the Ouagadougou Agreement. It commended the efforts of the government to ensure open, fair and transparent presidential elections. It noticed the problems of social inequality, poverty and illiteracy within the population. It made one recommendation. 52. Pakistan recognized that Côte d’Ivoire faced political challenges, affecting its capacity to ensure human rights. It noted the establishment of a Human Rights Ministry and National Human Rights Commission. It asked about the role of the police subdivision in this Ministry compared to conventional police. It noted that Côte d’Ivoire was signatory to most of international and regional human rights instruments but faced delays in submitting reports to different treaty bodies and supported its request for technical assistance in this regard. It made recommendations. 53. Mexico recognized Côte d’Ivoire’s commitment to human rights, evidenced in its judicial and institutional framework and its openness and cooperation with international and regional human rights mechanisms. It hoped this mechanism would contribute to national efforts and encouraged the international community to contribute. It took note of priorities, initiatives and commitments in the area of human rights in the national report and asked about measures to implement them. Mexico made recommendations.  54. Sweden welcomed that Côte d’Ivoire prohibits rape and female genital mutilation, but remained concerned about reported lack of enforcement. It noted the Secretary General mentioned a trend of abduction, rape and violence against women and girls and expressed concern about impunity. It noted that the Deputy High Commissioner for Human Rights voiced concern about the 2007 Amnesty Ordinance and thanked the delegation for the assurance that amnesty would not be applied to perpetrators of serious human rights violations. It expressed concern about reports on security forces’ abuse, children’s rights, the right to information, freedom of the media, and participation in public and political life. Sweden made recommendations. 55. Angola asked for information on health programmes and whether there had been an increase in the allocated budget, referring to the National Health Development Plan. It welcomed initiatives on women’s rights. Angola noted the creation of a Ministry for Solidarity and War Victims to assist internally displaced persons and asked how the international community can contribute in resolving the issue. Angola made recommendations. 56. Egypt commended Côte d’Ivoire for its efforts in establishing independent national human rights institutions, particularly the mandate of the State Mediator as an independent administrative authority with jurisdiction to conduct investigations in any Government office or agency, concerning human rights violations and freedoms of citizens. Egypt welcomed the establishment of a national committee, in 2000, to combat violence against women and children. Egypt made recommendations. 57. Morocco applauded the 2000 constitutional reform reaffirming Côte d’Ivoire’s commitment to the principles of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. It noted positively the decision to review the National Human Rights Commission and its compliance with the Paris Principles. It saluted the efforts in education and vocational training, and the dissemination of universal human rights principles. Morocco made recommendations. 58. Saudi Arabia noted efforts made to protect and strengthen human rights. Saudi Arabia drew attention to the strengthening of children’s rights and emphasized that the Government made every effort in the fields of human rights. It made one recommendation. 59. Bangladesh noted Côte d’Ivoire’s challenges: peace and security, rule of law, development and human rights. Decades of civil strife had affected social life and the national economy and poverty is widespread. It noted that Côte d’Ivoire was trying to improve the situation and that international support would be required. Bangladesh made recommendations. 60. Slovakia expressed concern about the conditions in detention centres and prisons, especially the lack of necessary infrastructure which resulted in overcrowding and poor hygiene. It noted that Côte d’Ivoire signed the Rome Statue of the International Criminal Court in 1998. Slovakia expressed concern about the lack of necessary infrastructure and qualified personal resources, population poverty and the alarming rate of school violence and sexual abuse, which resulted in an inadequate enjoyment of the right to education. Slovakia made recommendations. 61. China referred to measures taken to protect the rights of women and children, disabled persons and other vulnerable groups. It also noted the good cooperation with international and regional human rights organization. China asked what concrete difficulties the country faces and which measures it plans to take with regard to children who are unable to receive appropriate education. 62. Slovenia commended Côte d’Ivoire for the abolition of death penalty and the prohibition of female genital mutilation. While noting the willingness of the state to combat sexual violence, Slovenia was concerned about violence against women and children. Slovenia inquired which measures Côte d’Ivoire was considering to tackle the problem and effectively implement the 1998 law on female genital mutilation. Slovenia made recommendations. 63. While acknowledging the socio-economic challenges, Mauritius commended the government for pursuing a long-term strategy to promote economic, social and cultural rights. It welcomed the drafting of a poverty reduction strategic plan and the protection of the right to a healthy environment, which deserves international support. Mauritius made recommendations 64. Niger noted the Ouagadougou Agreement as a turning point for the return to peace and stability through the organization of free and transparent elections and the establishment of democratic institutions. It welcomed the establishment of independent mechanisms to defend and protect citizens. Regarding the organization of the upcoming elections, Niger asked about the measures taken to finalize the registration of voters. Niger made recommendations. 65. Viet Nam noted with satisfaction the efforts made, particularly to establish a normative and institutional framework, all testifying of the commitment of Côte d’Ivoire to the universal values of human rights. Viet Nam made recommendations. 66. Nigeria appreciated the establishment of bodies to regulate and monitor the implementation of the rights guaranteed under various instruments, including women’s and children’s rights, universal education and primary healthcare. It commended the efforts of Côte d’Ivoire in handling the incident in August 2006 of dumping of toxic waste. It asked about the level of success of the reforms in addressing major areas of concern. Nigeria made recommendations. 67. Cameroon noted the measures and the structures established to implement the ratified conventions and treaties. It encouraged Côte d’Ivoire to effectively implement all actions enumerated in the national report to promote and protect human rights. It called upon the Human Rights Council and the international community to provide greater assistance to Côte d’Ivoire as requested in paragraph 154 of the national report. 68. Luxembourg appreciated progress related to child soldiers, the abolition of death penalty and female genital mutilation. It noted the weak political participation of women, the persistence of female genital mutilation, polygamy and sexual violence. Luxembourg saluted the programme of economic reforms. It underlined the importance of having electoral lists based on consensus and demographic reality. It asked about measures taken for groups vulnerable to HIV/AIDS and the lead time for the adoption of legislation on reproductive health. Luxembourg made recommendations. 69. The Libyan Arab Jamahiriya noted with satisfaction the efforts of Côte d’Ivoire to promote and protect human rights at all levels. It recalled the efforts made to accede to most human rights instruments. It commended the Constitution for guaranteeing gender equality, the major progress in fighting gender-based discrimination and the creation of the National Human Rights Commission. The Libyan Arab Jamahiriya made a recommendation. 70. Burkina Faso recalled its commitment to work with Côte d’Ivoire in the context of the Ouagadougou Agreement in seeking a lasting peace guaranteeing democracy and the rule of law. It noted that the efforts to protect and promote human rights in Côte d’Ivoire encountered difficulties, which almost all countries of the sub-region are acquainted with and reaffirmed its support to Côte d’Ivoire. 71. Malaysia noted that Côte d’Ivoire remained resilient and committed to democratic ideals. It was pleased about cooperation between Côte d’Ivoire and United Nations’ human rights mechanisms, and the Security Council-mandated United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire (UNOCI). Malaysia made recommendations. 72. The Democratic Republic of the Congo noted that, despite instability, Côte d’Ivoire constantly worked to protect and promote human rights demonstrated by the establishment of mechanisms to consolidate the rule of law. It applauded efforts made in fighting trafficking and exploitation of children, female genital mutilation, and impunity. It enquired about the low number of parliamentarian women and about measures envisaged to expressly implement the abolition of death penalty. It made recommendations. 73. Uganda noted with satisfaction the lay down of an institutional framework for the separation of powers and an independent human rights institution. Uganda commended the Government for the achievements in its efforts to promote and protect human rights. Uganda made recommendations. 74. Norway appreciated that Côte d’Ivoire was party to most core human rights instruments and its cooperation with Special Procedures. Norway emphasized that civil society participation was essential and asked about it in the reporting process and in the follow-up to the periodic review. It was concerned about the reported violence against women and girls, including sexual violence; limited access to legal services; and that prosecution efforts were hampered in the judiciary. It was concerned about the vulnerable situation of human rights defenders and journalists. Norway made recommendations. 75. The United States of America welcomed Côte d’Ivoire’s commitment to ensuring that those at risk for HIV were not stigmatized or discriminated and asked about programmes to combat discrimination for HIV status. It noted that since the armed conflict, girls and women have been victims of brutal forms of sexual violence by armed men on both sides of the military and political divide, often accompanied by beating, torture, killing or mutilation. It made recommendations.  76. South Africa acknowledged the Government efforts in meeting its human rights obligations. It expressed concern about to the protection and care of children, domestic violence against children, worst forms of child labour and the situation of vulnerable children. South Africa asked which measures the Government implemented to protect children and what kind of support it provided to destitute women, who are also victims of domestic violence. It made recommendations. 77. Djibouti saluted the efforts made by Côte d’Ivoire to improve prisons’ conditions through their overhauling despite a lack of resources. Djibouti applauded the measures taken against members of the armed and police forces having used prohibited practices. It welcomed the adoption of the law for disabled people and specific projects to accelerate the rehabilitation of disadvantaged children. It encouraged Côte d’Ivoire to combat all forms of discrimination. Djibouti made recommendations. 78. Gabon regretted that the lengthy crisis has slowed down efforts relating to the management of population movement. It noted the flagrant and massive violations of human rights resulting from the civil war. It saluted the creation of a Ministry for Solidarity and Victims of War and a programme to encourage and assist the return of internally displaced persons. It noted the ongoing legislative and regulatory reforms. Gabon called on the United Nations and the international community to provide technical assistance to Côte d’Ivoire to complete its reform programme. Gabon made one recommendation. 79. Latvia referred to the issue of standing invitations to special procedures and made a recommendation in this regard. 80. Argentina took note of allegations reported by the Secretary-General regarding human rights violations by the “Forces Nouvelles” and expressed support for the UNOCI human rights component. Argentina recognized the prohibition of female genital mutilation but noted reports that it continued in practice. Argentina made recommendations. 81. Ghana urged the Government to further address the issue of impunity. Ghana highlighted the importance of education in avoiding further conflict and therefore welcomed the plans of the Government to introduce the values of the culture of peace in public and private education. Ghana supported the call for technical assistance and support from the international community to assist Côte d’Ivoire. Ghana made recommendations. 82. Senegal noted with satisfaction Côte d’Ivoire’s accession to most international and regional human rights instruments. It noted the progress achieved in the normative framework as well as the ongoing progress achieved and measures taken in promoting women’s rights. Senegal made recommendations. 83. Burundi was impressed to note that, despite the many obstacles, Côte d’Ivoire established a National Human Rights Commission. It was pleased to note that the Constitution guarantees the right to life, prohibit inhuman and cruel treatment, torture and all forms of degradation of human beings. Burundi invited Côte d’Ivoire to expedite the abrogation of all legal and statutory provisions suggesting death penalty and encouraged it to complete the peace process with the organization of general elections with the support of the international community. 84. Replying to the questions raised with regard to the National Human Rights Commission, the delegation said that, once the crisis was over, it would be a simple matter to bring the law into line with the Paris Principles. 85. Côte d’Ivoire was aware of the need to combat poverty. The Government had established a ministry to deal with issues of solidarity, and the ministry had drawn up a plan to combat poverty. 86. As to illiteracy, education was a priority in the Constitution. A plan to combat illiteracy had been put in place and primary education had been promoted, particularly for girls. 87. The delegation said that the elections had been put off several times but everything had been done to ensure that they would be as transparent as possible, with all Ivorians of voting age participating. The electoral rolls had been published and the process was now at the stage where any challenges could be made, after which a date for the elections would be set. 88. The delegation said that there was nothing to prevent consideration of any request for a visit from the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court. 89. The delegation recalled that education was a constitutional right and every effort would be made to ensure that it became a mandatory principle. 90. Abidjan prison was overcrowded despite the efforts being made. A new prison was to be built in order to make it possible to separate men, women and children. Prisoners should also be able to receive education and training as part of a personalized approach to penal sentences. 91. The delegation recalled its position on impunity and crimes not covered by the Amnesty Act. 92. Violence at school could not be tolerated. Children were protected by the law of the land and all acts of violence against children were liable to prosecution. 93. Côte d’Ivoire would ratify the various treaties in due course, once the crisis was over. The Constitution might have to be amended in the event of a conflict with a treaty. 94. The delegation recalled the steps taken to address the many challenges relating to gender equality, including the establishment of a directorate to reduce inequality between men and women in all sectors. As to sexual violence, Côte d’Ivoire was the first country in Africa to have adopted a national plan to implement Security Council resolution 1325 (2000). 95. There was a decentralized National Committee to Combat Violence against Women and Children. 96. On the question of child labour and exploitation, a number of texts and projects were in place and action was coordinated with NGOs. Coordinated action was also being taken on HIV/AIDS, notably awareness-raising campaigns and medical treatment for those affected or infected. 97. To improve women’s involvement in political life, the President had decided to introduce a quota system, which was now being codified. 98. The head of delegation thanked all those who had taken part in the working group. II. Conclusions and/or recommendations 99. The recommendations formulated during the interactive dialogue and listed below enjoy the support of Côte d’Ivoire: 1. Take all necessary steps to implement the outstanding elements of the peace agreement and to complete the electoral process as quickly as possible (United Kingdom); 2. Continue the reconciliation policy and implement, with support from the international community, all decisions resulting from the Ouagadougou Agreement (Algeria); 3. Pursue its efforts towards the establishment of a stable political environment and the implementation of the provisions of the Ouagadougou Agreement (Djibouti); 4. Speed up the implementation and take measures to ensure the popularization of the Rural Land Act, an essential measure in settling inter.communal disputes (Canada); 5. Finalize the ongoing legislative reforms, particularly those related to family law, the criminal code and the criminal procedural code (Democratic Republic of the Congo); 6. Amend the founding legislation of the National Human Rights Commission with a view to bringing it into compliance with the Paris Principles (Netherlands); 7. Strengthen effectiveness, autonomy and independence of the National Human Rights Commission so that it fully complies with the Paris Principles, especially with regard to the participation of civil society in its work (France); 8. Amend the law establishing the National Human Rights Commission, particularly as far as a pluralist and independent representation is concerned, with the objectives of bringing it into line with the Paris Principles and seeking accreditation by the International Coordinating Committee (Ireland); 9. Continue its efforts to further strengthen the National Human Rights Commission in accordance with the Paris Principles (Pakistan); 10. Review the National Human Rights Commission with the aim of bringing it into conformity with the Paris Principles (Egypt); 11. Pursue its efforts to review the composition of the National Human Rights Commission and to bring it into line with the Paris Principles (Morocco); 12. Establish a national human rights commission based on the Paris Principles (Niger); 13. Continue the actions it has undertaken to overcome the crisis, consolidate the rule of law and fight poverty and unemployment (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya); 14. Examine the possibilities for developing a legislative framework for the issue of compensation to war victims and a set of measures to overcome the problem of internally displaced persons (Belarus); 15. Attach greater priority to protection and aid programmes for victims of the crisis and vulnerable social groups, especially orphans, abandoned children and displaced persons (Viet Nam); 16. Pursue the policy of national reconciliation and promotion of the rule of law (Mauritius); 17. Intensify measures to promote human rights and consolidate peace in the country through dialogue and mechanisms of reconciliation (Uganda); 18. Participate in the UNOCI mandate for training and activities of promotion, awareness-raising and technical assistance to face key human rights challenges, including impunity and grave violations of the rights of women and children (Argentina); 19. Develop programmes to promote tolerance and respect for all persons and to guarantee the rights of privacy and non-discrimination (United States); 20. Step up efforts to protect the human rights and improve the lives of children, including orphans and children with disabilities, through, inter alia, reviewing related policies and increasing in the budget allocation for specific programmes for vulnerable groups (Malaysia);1 21. Provide human rights training specifically focused on protection of the human rights of women, children and other vulnerable groups to civil servants, military forces and police, prison and judicial staff and ensure their full accountability for any violations of human rights in all situations (Czech Republic); 22. Give priority to human rights education and training on all levels, according to the criteria defined by the World Programme for Human Rights Education (Italy); 23. Consolidate progress made in the field of human rights education and envisage setting up, with the assistance of the international community, national human rights education and training programmes, particularly training and awareness-raising of security forces, law enforcement officials and members of the judiciary (Morocco); 24. Build on its human rights and fundamental freedoms training through the elaboration of specific training programmes to prevent the abuse of power (Spain); 25. Submit its pending reports to the relevant treaty bodies and, to this end, seek technical assistance to strengthen its capacity for preparing the relevant reports (Pakistan); 26. Significantly improve its cooperation with the United Nations treaty bodies by agreeing on timelines for submitting overdue reports and, if need be, identify needs for assistance to that end (Norway); 27. Address discrimination against children through a review and reorientation of policies and launch comprehensive public information campaigns to prevent and combat all forms of discrimination, where needed within the framework of international cooperation (Azerbaijan); 28. Take measures to ensure non-discrimination on grounds of sexual orientation and gender identity (Slovenia); 29. Abolish all legislation that discriminates against women (Luxembourg); 30. Continue to reform its policies and programmes with a view to improving the status of women, girls and children, including those with disabilities, and protecting them against violence and sexual abuse, as well as strengthening measures and mechanisms on administration of justice (Nigeria); 31. Facilitate equitable distribution of the nation’s wealth in order to address any imbalances in and among the regions which could lead to future disagreements (Ghana); 32. Spare no efforts to firmly combat the practice of arbitrary and summary executions and the climate of impunity which prevails on its territory, with the assistance of the international community (Gabon); 33. Taking into consideration the reports of the Secretary-General about alleged human rights violations committed by the “Forces Nouvelles”, take measures to ensure the right to life, physical integrity and security of people (Argentina); 34. Strengthen measures conducive to responding to the recommendations made by the Secretary-General in 2007, directed to the prevention and elimination of all types of violence, especially sexual violence, against women and girls (Mexico); 35. In view of the Secretary-General’s reports, elaborate a national action plan that addresses the prevalence of sexual violence, especially towards girls (Argentina); 36. Continue ongoing efforts and adopt effective measures and policies to stop and prevent sexual violence against women and girls (Sweden); 37. Finalize the national action plan to combat sexual violence and take appropriate measures to prevent and protect all civilians from all forms of violence and to fight impunity (Slovenia); 38. Undertake awareness-raising campaigns to sensitize the security forces and to ensure the effective prosecution of perpetrators of sexual violence (Austria); 39. Take all measures to protect women against all forms of sexual violence and bring to an end the related impunity (Luxembourg); 40. Investigate cases of domestic violence and sexual abuse at schools and sanction the perpetrators (Holy See); 41. Thoroughly investigate all allegations of sexual violence and bring perpetrators of such crimes to justice, in accordance with international standards (Sweden); 42. Effectively investigate and prosecute allegations of sexual violence and intensify efforts to finalize a national action plan to combat sexual violence (Norway); 43. Seek to end impunity for perpetrators of sexual violence by thoroughly investigating all credible allegations of sexual violence and prosecuting individuals against whom there is sufficient evidence of such abuses, in compliance with its obligations under the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights regarding due process (United States); 44. Further strengthen law enforcement and the judicial system in the effort to address impunity and reduce the incidence of domestic violence as well as physical and sexual abuse of women and girls (Malaysia); 45. Provide adequate support to the victims of sexual violence, in particular through the provision of counselling services and safe places (Austria); 46. Strengthen measures to combat violence against women, particularly that related to female genital mutilation (Angola); 47. Continue its efforts to end female genital mutilation, inter alia through enforcement of legislation and implementation of programmes sensitizing the population about its harmful effects (Egypt); 48. Elaborate and implement a law and programmes to draw attention to the harmful effects of excision (Luxembourg); 49. Take all measures to ensure the effective prohibition of female genital mutilation, including, among others, the implementation of awareness-raising programmes for the population about its terrible effects (Argentina); 50. Intensify ongoing sensitization activities, carried out together with members of civil society, towards the reduction, or even the eradication in the future, of female genital mutilation (Senegal); 51. Within the context of incorporating the values of the culture of peace in public and private education, include actions to eliminate violence in schools and to address the special needs of children affected by conflict (Ghana);2 52. Take further measures to improve the conditions of detention and to investigate deaths in detention and bring those responsible to justice (Netherlands); 53. Speed up the plans to improve the situation in prisons, including the prompt construction of a new special prison in Abidjan for women and juveniles to provide for their separation from serious criminals (Slovakia); 54. Take effective measures to end arbitrary detentions, in particular by strengthening judicial oversight over the security forces (Austria); 55. Pay special attention to protection of children of persons in detention or prison (Czech Republic); 56. Provide separate prison and detention facilities for minors, male and female inmates and improve access of inmates to adequate food and medical care (Czech Republic); 57. Continue to effectively combat arbitrary arrest and pursue redeployment of the administration to reduce these practices as much as possible (Djibouti); 58. Continue and deepen the positive ongoing actions to protect children, including from trafficking and exploitation of minors (Cuba); 59. Continue efforts to eliminate trafficking in children and address the problem of street children and child labour (Belarus); 60. Strengthen policies aimed at protecting children from trafficking and forced labour (Angola); 61. With the support of the international community, pursue its efforts to reduce crime and combat smuggling and trafficking of children and strengthen this with awareness-raising actions and training on the rights of the child (Algeria); 62. Adopt and implement an action plan to end impunity and reinforce its judicial system (Canada); 63. Take further action on justice sector reform to improve the efficiency of the judicial system (United Kingdom); 64. Continue its efforts to strengthen the judicial system through, inter alia, technical training and development assistance (South Africa); 65. Envisage implementing, with assistance from OHCHR, international human rights and humanitarian law training and awareness-raising programmes for State officials in charge of security, law enforcement personnel and members of the judiciary (Algeria); 66. Commit itself to establishing judicial procedures that uphold the rights of those accused of crimes and sent to court, or release people held in pre-trial detention (Ireland); 67. Improve access to justice of its citizens by reviewing legal aid procedures and the establishment of new courts (Italy); 68. Establish a system of juvenile justice to guarantee protection of the rights of the child in this situation (Czech Republic); 69. Pursue actions aimed at strengthening and harmonizing the child protection legal framework, including the establishment of child protection units within the various tribunals of the country (Italy); 70. Focus on the development of law enforcement capacities in order to fight impunity (Germany); 71. Consider prioritizing the restoration of the rule of law in the country through, inter alia, the adoption of measures aimed at combating impunity (South Africa); 72. Continue efforts to strengthen the institution of the family and improve the situation of women (Belarus); 73. Effectively investigate and prosecute crimes and violations against human rights defenders and journalists (Norway); 74. Guarantee the free, open and transparent nature of future presidential elections so that they are properly carried out and credible (France); 75. Intensify cooperation with the Independent Electoral Commission to set a definitive date for holding presidential elections and to ensure that the registry of voters and the identification of the population is carried out in an adequate and reliable manner (Spain); 76. Finalize the preparation of the elections, which have been postponed many times, so that they can be held quickly (Luxembourg); 77. Ensure that all citizens can take part in political life without discrimination (Brazil); 78. Pursue, with additional support from its development partners, the implementation of a national strategy for sustainable development, including poverty reduction, which is a fundamental condition for promoting human rights (Mauritius); 79. Continue its efforts to ensure sustainable development and attainment of the goals set out in the Millennium Declaration (Russian Federation); 80. Formulate more effective development strategies and programmes to reduce poverty and provide employment and income-generating opportunities for the population, in particular youth and people living in rural areas (Malaysia); 81. Strengthen measures aimed at poverty eradication and improvement of access to social services (South Africa); 82. Continue positive ongoing efforts with a view to ensuring the access of all citizens to health (Cuba); 83. Collaborate with international aid agencies to improve medical assistance and distribute free medical certificates for victims of sexual violence, carry out an awareness-raising campaign throughout the country about the relationship between sexual violence and HIV/AIDS prevention and give priority to the establishment of sexual and reproductive health programmes for women and girls (Spain); 84. Continue to fight HIV/AIDS with the support and cooperation of the international community (Bangladesh); 85. Ensure that measures to address HIV also address the broader needs of vulnerable communities (United States);3 86. Continue to provide assistance and care for children and ensure that they have access to education and health (Saudi Arabia); 87. Work with all relevant stakeholders, including non and civil society, in addressing the problem involving the movements of toxic waste (Nigeria); 88. To continue implementing national strategy to combat poverty and hunger (Brazil); 89. Strengthen poverty reduction policies (Angola); 90. Continue to fight poverty with the support and cooperation of the international community (Bangladesh); 91. Promote education for all without discrimination (Bangladesh); 92. Take all measures that it thinks are appropriate to expand primary education for all children, in rural as well as in urban areas, and make sure that it benefits equally girls and boys (Algeria); 93. Strengthen the free and compulsory primary education system and to reduce the gender and rural-urban disparities (Holy See); 94. Strengthen its measures to ensure that poverty does not preclude children from attending school and that schools are free from discrimination for girls and boys alike (Czech Republic); 95. Promote awareness amongst Internally Displaced Persons (idps) of their human rights and adopt specific measures to identify idps in need and provide them assistance (Czech Republic); 96. Take all necessary measures to provide idps with needed assistance (Germany); 97. Include civil society in following up on the recommendations that will be accepted by Côte d’Ivoire within this periodic review (Belgium); 98. Continue close cooperation with various stakeholders and non.governmental organizations in the follow-up of this review (Austria); 99. As a follow-up to the results of the review, design and implement a national programme to apply the initiatives and commitments mentioned in the national report (Mexico); 100. Establish an effective and inclusive process to follow up on the periodic review recommendations (Norway); 101. Seek technical and financial assistance from the international community to implement the recommendations from the periodic review (Brazil); 102. Seek from the international community, especially United Nations organs and programmes, the necessary technical and financial assistance for the implementation of periodic review recommendations (Angola); 103. Request necessary aid and technical assistance from the international community, notably United Nations development agencies, to be assisted in its efforts to promote and protect human rights in general, and to implement periodic review recommendations in particular (Morocco); 104. Recommend that the international community provide technical assistance to Côte d’Ivoire to strengthen the capacity of its national mechanisms responsible for preparing periodic reports for treaty bodies and assist Côte d’Ivoire in training law enforcement officials, judges and police officers in the area of human rights (Egypt); 105. Recommend that the international community help Côte d’Ivoire in its firm will to fight crime, sexual violence and trafficking of children through the establishment of adequate mechanisms in line with international standards (Niger); 106. Recommend that the international community help political actors to implement the decisions resulting from the Ouagadougou Agreement (Niger); 107. Call upon the international community to provide technical and financial assistance to Côte d’Ivoire to further contribute to the consolidation of human rights (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya); 108. Call upon the international community to provide substantial technical assistance to Côte d’Ivoire in order to expand the already outstanding achievements made in human rights promotion (Senegal). 100. Côte d’Ivoire considers that recommendations Nos. 18, 19, 21, 22, 35, 40, 41, 42, 43, 48, 66, 67, 68, 69 and 73 above in paragraph 99 are either already implemented or in the process of implementation. 101. The following recommendations will be examined by Côte d’Ivoire, which will provide responses in due time. The response of Côte d’Ivoire to these recommendations will be included in the outcome report adopted by the Human Rights Council at its thirteenth session: 1. Ratify the Protocol to the African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights on the Rights of Women in Africa and adopt the necessary legislation for its implementation (Belgium); 2. Sign and ratify OP-CEDAW (Belgium); 3. Consider ratifying the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court (United Kingdom); 4. Adhere to the Rome Statute (Brazil); 5. Ratify the Rome Statute, including accession to the Agreement on its Privileges and Immunities (Slovakia); 6. Ratify the Rome Statute, which Côte d’Ivoire signed, and transcribe its provisions into national law (Mauritius); 7. Consider signing and ratifying the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment (OP-CAT) (United Kingdom); 8. Ratify OP-CAT (Brazil); 9. Accede to OP-CAT and establish its national preventive mechanism accordingly (Czech Republic); 10. Ratify the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD), OP-CAT and the Rome Statute (Austria); 11. Adhere to all Protocols to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (Brazil); 12. Consider the possibility of ratifying International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance (CED), as well as accepting the competency of the relevant Committee (Argentina); 13. Ratify the two optional protocols to CRC, ICRMW and the Convention relating to the Status of Stateless Persons (Congo); 14. Ratify the Optional Protocol to CRC on the involvement of children in armed conflict (Mauritius); 15. Expedite the ratification of the two Optional Protocols to CRC (Uganda); 16. Ratify the following international human rights instruments: the second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights; OP-CAT; the two Optional Protocols to CRC; CRPD and its Optional Protocol and the Rome Statute (Chile); 17. As pledged in the national report, envisage signing and ratifying the Convention on the Reduction of Statelessness and the International Convention for the protection of All Persons From Enforced Disappearance (Democratic Republic of the Congo); 18. Spare no effort to complete as soon as possible the ratification process for the international human rights instruments listed in pages 23 and 24 of the national report in its French version (Senegal); 19. Take effective measures on sexual violence against children and consider the ratification of the Optional Protocols to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography and on the involvement of children in armed conflict (Azerbaijan); 20. Take further measures to reduce the number of stateless in the country and sign and ratify the Convention on the Reduction of Statelessness and the Convention relating to the Status of Stateless Persons (Netherlands); 21. Take the necessary measures to allow stateless children born in its territory to acquire Ivorian nationality and remove discriminatory grounds of eligibility for naturalization, including the requirement that persons must be free of mental or physical handicaps (Canada);6 22. Adopt specific legislation to protect women and children with a view to fully implement the provisions of CEDAW and CRC (Brazil);7 23. Grant investigative competences to the National Committee to combat violence against women and children created in 2000 (Belgium); 24. Invite the African Commission and United Nations Special Rapporteurs on human rights defenders for a joint visit (Ireland); 25. Consider inviting the United Nations Special Rapporteur on human rights defenders and the Special Rapporteur on human rights defenders of the African Commission on Human Rights for a joint visit (Norway); 26. Extend an open and permanent invitation to the United Nations human rights special procedures mandate holders (Chile); 27. Consider extending a standing invitation to all special procedures of the Human Rights Council (Latvia); 28. Put in practice concrete programs for awareness raising against discrimination for gender identity and sexual orientation, guarantee the respect for privacy (Spain); 29. Ensure the basic needs of vulnerable groups with educational programs, and prevention and assistance on HIV/AIDS (Spain); 30. Reinforce policies to tackle domestic and sexual violence against women and girls in accordance with international human rights standards (Chile);8 31. Continue its policy of judicial and penitentiary legislative reform notably in order to strengthen its capacity in the administration of justice and to increase transparency and access to justice for all Ivorians, without discrimination based on resources (France);9 32. Take the necessary steps for the effective investigation and prosecution of the serious human rights violations that occurred during the fighting in 2002/2003 (Austria); 33. Authorize the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court to conduct a mission in Côte d’Ivoire, as prescribed by the Rome Statute (Belgium); 34. Allow for a mission to the Office of the Prosecutor General of the International Criminal Court to undertake investigations into acts committed in the country after the events of September 2002 (Slovakia); 35. Take concrete measures to make primary education effectively compulsory and free (Ireland); 36. Take all necessary measures towards the achievement of the objective of universal primary education for all by 2015 (Slovenia);10 37. In the framework of efforts by the Government to raise school enrolment, strengthen the measures aimed at eliminating social, economic and cultural barriers that are obstacles to access and stay of children in the school system, including through setting up a multisectorial strategy to that end (Mexico); 38. Adopt efficient educational policies, notably through enforcing full accountability for school violence, human rights training programmes for teachers, and continuous expansion of the school network and its resources to guarantee a truly obligatory and accessible primary education (Slovakia); 39. Devote more resources to national development plans to better ensure the most essential economic and social rights of its population (Viet Nam);11 102. All conclusions and/or recommendations contained in the present report reflect the position of the submitting State(s) and/or the State under review. They should not be construed as endorsed by the Working Group as a whole.  Notes 1 	The recommendation as read during the interactive dialogue: step up efforts to protect the human rights and improve the lives of children of the marginalized groups, including orphans, children with disabilities, children from ethnic minorities and Muslim children and girls through inter alia review of related policies and increase in the budget allocation for specific programmes for the vulnerable groups. 2 	The recommendation as read during the interactive dialogue: include actions to eliminate violence in schools, and to address the special needs of children affected by conflict in the administrative measures. 3 	The recommendation as read during the interactive dialogue: measures to address HIV should also address the broader needs of marginalized communities. 4 	The recommendation as read during the interactive dialogue: ratify the Conventions that have not yet been ratified, particularly, the two optional protocols to CRC, ICRMW and the Convention relating to the Status of Stateless Persons. 5 	The recommendation as read during the interactive dialogue: as pledged in the national report, envisage signing and ratifying some international and regional instruments to defend and promote human rights. 6 	The recommendation as read during the interactive dialogue: amend its nationality code to avoid cases of statelessness. 7 	The recommendation as read during the interactive dialogue: adopt specific legislation to protect women and children. 8 	The recommendation as read during the interactive dialogue: reinforce policies to tackle domestic and sexual violence against women and girls and adjust practices and customs to the international human rights standards. 9 	The recommendation as read during the interactive dialogue: continue its policy of judicial and penitentiary legislative reform notably in order to strengthen its capacity in the administration of justice in the North of the country and to increase transparency and access to justice in the South for all Ivorians, without discrimination based on resources. 10 	The recommendation as read during the interactive dialogue: take all necessary measures to narrow the distance to the objective to achieve universal primary education for all by 2015. 11 	The recommendation as read during the interactive dialogue: devote more resources to national development plans to better ensure the most essential economic and social rights of its population, more particularly the right to food, medical care and poverty reduction programs, unemployment and illiteracy, the rates of which remain high in Côte d’Ivoire. Annex Composition of the delegation The delegation of Côte d’Ivoire was headed by Mr. Tia Koné, President of the Supreme Court and composed of the following members: • S.E.M. Guy-Alain Gauze, 	Ambassadeur, Représentant Permanent de la Côte d’Ivoire auprès de l’ONU, de l’OMC et des autres organisations internationales • Monsieur	 Albert K. Brou, Magistrat Hors Hiérarchie, Conseiller Technique du Président de la République, Président du Groupe de travail national EPU Côte d’Ivoire • Monsieur	 Sia Bi Sei, Ambassadeur, Directeur du Département des Affaires Générales et Humanitaires au Ministère des Affaires Étrangères • Monsieur Gaudji Koudou Joseph Désiré, Chef de Cabinet à la Cour suprême • Monsieur Kassy Joseph Acka, Directeur de la Réglementation et de la Promotion des Droits de l’Homme au Ministère de la Justice et des Droits de l’Homme • Monsieur Dah Roger Anamboulié Charlemagne, Procureur de la République près du Tribunal de Première Instance de Korhogo • Madame	 Yao née Euphrasie Hortense Kouassi, Directrice de l’Egalité et de la Promotion du Genre au Ministère de la Famille, de la Femme et des Affaires Sociales • Monsieur Kouakou Kouadio, Premier Conseiller à la Mission Permanente de Côte d’Ivoire à Genève • Monsieur Abdoulaye Essy, Conseiller à la Mission Permanente de Côte d’Ivoire à Genève • Monsieur	 Kablan Alain Porquet Conseiller à la Mission Permanente de Côte d’Ivoire à New York • Monsieur Tiemoko Moriko, Conseiller à la Mission Permanente de Côte d’Ivoire à Genève • Monsieur Kouassi Martin Anoh, Conseiller d’Ambassade au Ministère des Affaires Étrangères • Monsieur N’Vadro Bamba, Conseiller à la Mission Permanente de Côte d’Ivoire à Genève • Mademoiselle Emilienne Krouzou, chargée d’études et point focal EPU au ministère de la Santé et de l’Hygiène publique • Monsieur Kanvaly Cisse, chef du Protocole à la Cour suprême • Monsieur Bakary Bamba Jr., Attaché à la Mission Permanente de Côte d’Ivoire à Genève 