  United Nations  A/HRC/22/3    General Assembly  Distr.: General 26 December 2012  Original: English  Human Rights Council Twenty-second session Agenda item 6 Universal Periodic Review   Report of the Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review*  * The annex to the present report is circulated as received.   Czech Republic Contents  Paragraphs Page   Introduction .............................................................................................................  1–4 3  I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process ................................................  5–93 3   A. Presentation by the State under review ...........................................................  5–20 3   B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review ........................  21–93 5  II. Conclusions and/or recommendations .....................................................................  94–95 14  Annex   Composition of the delegation .........................................................................................................  24 Introduction 1. The Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review, established in accordance with Human Rights Council resolution 5/1 of 18 June 2007, held its fourteenth session from 22 October to 5 November 2012. The review of the Czech Republic was held at the 1st meeting, held on 22 October 2012. The delegation of the Czech Republic was headed by Vladimír Galu.ka, Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs. At its 10th meeting, held on 29 October 2012, the Working Group adopted the report on the Czech Republic. 2. On 3 May 2012, the Human Rights Council selected the following group of rapporteurs (troika) to facilitate the review of the Czech Republic: Chile, Malaysia and Mauritania. 3. In accordance with paragraph 15 of the annex to resolution 5/1 and paragraph 5 of the annex to resolution 16/21, the following documents were issued for the review of the Czech Republic:  (a) A national report submitted/written presentation made in accordance with paragraph 15 (a) (A/HRC/WG.6/14/CZE/1);  (b) A compilation prepared by Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) in accordance with paragraph 15 (b) (A/HRC/WG.6/14/CZE/2 and Corr.2);  (c) A summary prepared by OHCHR in accordance with paragraph 15 (c) (A/HRC/WG.6/14/CZE/3). 4. A list of questions prepared in advance by Belarus, Denmark, Mexico, Norway, Slovenia, Spain, the Netherlands and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland was transmitted to the Czech Republic through the troika. These questions are available on the extranet of the universal periodic review (UPR).  I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process  A. Presentation by the State under review 5. The Czech Republic highlighted its transparent approach to the preparation of the national report. The Office of the Government Commissioner for Human Rights had regularly invited representatives of civil society to submit their comments on the draft national report. 6. The Czech Republic particularly mentioned the adoption of the Anti-Discrimination Act in 2009. It had also ratified several human rights instruments, including the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court, the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD) and the Additional Protocol to the European Social Charter Providing for a System of Collective Complaints. The adoption of legislation concerning the criminal liability of legal entities would allow the Czech Republic to proceed with the ratification of other United Nations and Council of Europe conventions. The Czech Republic focused its efforts on the integration of the Roma minority by elaborating comprehensive strategies on that issue. Inclusive education of Roma children was addressed by new legislation setting rules for placement of children in practical schools. The National Strategy for the Protection of the Rights of the Child was designed to fully meet the obligations arising from the Convention on the Rights of the Child. Similar strategies had been developed to improve the lives of persons with disabilities and victims of human trafficking. 7. The Czech Republic highlighted the promotion of equal treatment and respect towards Roma in all its policies. The Government Agency for Social Inclusion and the Commissioner for Human Rights were preparing a new three-year anti-racism campaign, to begin in 2013. In response to the recent social challenges, the Commissioner was establishing a working group for solving all future similar social conflicts. 8. Czech Labour Offices paid special attention to all long-term unemployed persons, including Roma, for whom they developed individual tailored action plans. At the same time, the Czech Republic highlighted that due to personal data protection, the authorities were not allowed to collect data based on ethnicity. 9. Regarding the representation of Roma in public service, the Czech Republic stated that public service was open to everyone regardless of race or ethnicity. Roma were often employed as teacher assistants, social workers and regional coordinators or local counsellors for Roma minority affairs. 10. Regarding Roma integration, the Government Council for Roma Minority Affairs was the principal platform for the Government’s cooperation with the Roma minority. Each region was obliged to appoint a coordinator for Roma minority affairs. Many municipalities had created the post of Roma counsellor. 11. Regarding inclusive education for Roma children, the Czech Republic referred to the legislative changes aimed at the education of every child according to his or her learning abilities. The temporary placement of socially disadvantaged children in practical schools as a last resort to improve their education chances would be abolished. It planned to monitor the ethnicity of children in practical schools to evaluate the progress of integration of children with special needs into mainstream education. 12. Regarding hate crime, the Czech Republic stated that various forms of hate crime were subject to different provisions of the Criminal Code and a racial motive constituted an aggravating circumstance. All crimes were duly investigated and prosecuted to bring the perpetrators to justice. 13. The Czech Republic was introducing new comprehensive strategies to protect the rights of the child: a new bill on the social and legal protection of children had been prepared, whose main aim was to reduce the high number of children in institutional care and to promote preventive work with families. 14. Regarding gender equality, the Czech Republic stated that the Anti-Discrimination Act prohibited discrimination based on sex and gender and entrusted the Ombudsman with powers to help discrimination victims, to carry out surveys and to issue recommendations on the fight against discrimination. The Government Council for Equal Opportunities for Women and Men may evaluate Government policies from the point of gender equality and propose policies in that field. Victims of discrimination may refer to special public control bodies which can impose sanctions, or to courts which can award compensation. 15. Regarding alleged participation in the illegal detention and transportation of prisoners by the CIA, the Czech Republic stated that all cases of persons transferred to another country through its territory, and all extradition cases, were processed strictly in accordance with the applicable legislation, which respects the international human rights commitments of the Czech Republic. It had also conducted a full and independent inquiry into alleged secret CIA flights through its territory, which did not find any case of persons being carried in transit through or extradited from its territory to countries where they would face torture or other cruel and inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment. 16. Regarding prison conditions, the Czech Republic stated that the Government had introduced new legislation that would reduce the number of prisoners. The Government also focused its efforts on improving prison conditions. 17. The Czech Republic stated that it had developed a long-term policy concept on the integration of foreigners. Foreigners could use a wide range of services provided by the State, regions and municipalities for counselling and assistance. 18. Regarding special policies for women and elderly persons, the Czech Republic stated that it had adopted several action plans against domestic violence with measures aimed at victims, witnesses and the perpetrators. The rights of the victim would be supported by a future law on crime victims. 19. Concerning elderly persons, the State had adopted the National Programme to Prepare for Population Ageing (2008–2012), aimed at creating a supportive, integrated and friendly environment for older people with full respect for their rights and dignity. The Government Council for Older Persons and Population Ageing provided a platform for Government representatives, civil society and non-governmental organizations (NGOs) to meet and discuss the problems of the elderly population. 20. The Czech Republic also referred to the ratification of the Optional Protocol to CRPD. The establishment of the independent monitoring mechanism was currently being discussed in the Government.  B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review 21. During the interactive dialogue, 61 delegations made statements. Recommendations made during the dialogue are to be found in section II of the present report. 22. The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea raised concerns about the continued racially motivated discrimination against Roma, including attempted homicides, property damages, discrimination in children’s education and enforced sterilization of Roma women. It also stressed allegations of trafficking of foreign migrant workers and fraud in the forest industry, where people were forced to work up to 12 hours per day with very little or no pay. DPRK made recommendations. 23. Denmark shared its appreciation of the activities of the Agency for Social Inclusion within the field of the integration of national minorities. It however noted the persistent segregation of Roma children in schools, stressing their disproportionate number in special schools while they constitute only 2 per cent of the Czech population. Denmark made recommendations. 24. Egypt noted that despite legislative and policy measures to fight social exclusion there was persistent discrimination and racism against migrants and minorities, in particular Roma. It referred to the widespread opposition to the opening of new mosques, involving the use of xenophobic and racist statements. Egypt made recommendations. 25. Estonia thanked the Czech Republic for the additional information provided in its opening speech and noted the cooperation of the Czech Republic with treaty bodies and special procedures. It also noted that the Government had taken a number of positive measures to implement the recommendations received and to promote and protect the rights of the child and persons with disabilities. Estonia made a recommendation. 26. Finland noted the sustained efforts made to improve the situation of Roma and other minorities. However, it raised concerns regarding the disproportionately high number of practical schools or separated classes for Roma children. It enquired about measures to ensure that Roma children have access to the same schools as the other children in a non-discriminatory manner. Finland made recommendations. 27. France enquired about the measures taken to stop discrimination against Roma children, in particular in the schooling system. It also enquired about the compensation given to women victims of forced sterilization. It requested information about the specific measures taken to combat human trafficking within the framework of the strategy adopted by the Czech Republic for the period 2008–2015. France made recommendations. 28. Germany enquired about the impact of Government actions for the prevention of social exclusion and the concrete steps taken to improve the housing situation of low-income families and the picture of social minorities in general. It expressed concern about racial discrimination and violence against the Roma population and asked what actions had been taken to raise awareness among the Czech population. 29. Greece noted the measures taken by the Czech Republic to promote the rights of minorities and Roma. It however shared the concerns of treaty bodies and NGOs regarding the segregation of Roma children and requested information on the so-called practical schools. Greece made recommendations. 30. Hungary enquired about the results of the survey on the number of Roma pupils. It also asked about the extent of the increase in the spending on Roma integration since the previous UPR review. Hungary requested information on the status of the planned ratification of the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography (OP-CRC-SC) and related conventions of the Council of Europe. Hungary made recommendations. 31. India welcomed the willingness of the Czech Republic to ratify conventions concerning protection of the rights of the child. It urged the Government to continue enacting and implementing legislative measures and policies to end discrimination and segregation, especially those based on religion, belief or world view. India made a recommendation. 32. Indonesia welcomed the adoption of the Anti-Discrimination Act and the National Plan of Action for Inclusive Education, but raised concerns about the implementation of the latter. It noted the Government’s position on ratification of the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families. Indonesia made recommendations. 33. The Islamic Republic of Iran highlighted the concerns raised by treaty bodies and special procedures in the compilation about the violations of human rights of Roma. The Islamic Republic of Iran made recommendations. 34. Iraq welcomed the Government’s commitment to human rights and the ratification of a large number of international instruments, as well as the open invitation extended to the special procedures. Iraq made recommendations. 35. Ireland commended the Government for its progress in improving the legal protection of children in recent legislation. It stressed the Ombudsman’s limited role with regard to children’s rights. Ireland noted the establishment of the programme to support and protect victims of human trafficking. Ireland made recommendations. 36. Italy requested information about the Czech national experience in dealing with discrimination based on multiple grounds. It also asked the Czech Republic to provide information on the issue of Roma children attending special schools originally envisaged for children with disabilities instead of ordinary education institutions. 37. Jordan commended the Government for the ratification of human rights conventions concerning persons with disabilities, human trafficking and protection of the rights of the child. It also commended the Government for the ratification of the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court and for the efforts to strengthen its institutional framework. Jordan made recommendations. 38. Kyrgyzstan expressed its satisfaction with the Government’s steps to strengthen its legislative and institutional frameworks with regard to anti-discrimination legislation. It raised concerns regarding the discrimination and segregation of Roma children in schools. It encouraged the Government to address the issue of prostitution and other forms of sexual exploitation of children. Kyrgyzstan made recommendations. 39. Libya commended the Government for its efforts to promote and human rights. It also commended the Czech Republic for its efforts to combat discrimination and racism. It further welcomed the ratification of CRPD. Libya made recommendations. 40. Liechtenstein commended the Government for adopting in 2012 the National Strategy for the Protection of the Rights of the Child. It congratulated the Government on its commitment to start the process of amending its penal code to fully comply with the Rome Statute. Lichtenstein made recommendations. 41. Malaysia praised the Czech Republic for the measures taken to address the issue of racism, discrimination and xenophobia towards Roma. However, it raised concern about the demonstrations, marches and rallies against them. It urged the Government to heed the call of the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination to investigate racially motivated acts of violence against Roma and punish their perpetrators. Malaysia made recommendations. 42. Mexico noted the ratification of the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court and CRPD. It referred to the new legislation as a step towards the ratification of international instruments regarding combat against organized crime. Mexico made recommendations. 43. Morocco enquired about the measures taken to combat extremism on the Internet. It requested information on measures taken to harmonize national legislation with international law. Morocco asked whether the mandate of the Ombudsman included mediation for children. It also requested information on the results achieved by the ambitious integration plan in the educational system. 44. Namibia commended the Czech Republic for its commitment to the protection of human rights by providing foreigners with opportunities for tertiary education. It referred to the social policies aimed at improving access to housing for poor communities. Namibia made recommendations. 45. The Netherlands thanked the Government for answering the advance questions concerning additional measures taken to tackle hate crimes and the mandate of the Gender Equality Unit. It recognized steps taken to improve the situation of Roma. The Netherlands made a recommendation. 46. Nicaragua welcomed the adoption of a national strategy for child protection. However, it raised concern that some areas were not covered, such as trafficking of children, children of minority groups and migrants. Nicaragua made recommendations. 47. Norway expressed support for the work of the Agency for Social Inclusion to counter discrimination and promote inclusion of the Roma minority. However, Norway remained concerned about the access to justice for victims of discrimination. It also referred to the number of Roma students attending so-called practical schools. Norway made recommendations. 48. Palestine welcomed the adoption of the Anti-Discrimination Act in 2009. It commended the Czech Republic for ratifying the Rome Statute and CRPD. It expressed concern that children under the age of 15 could be placed in institutional care prior to legal proceedings. Palestine made recommendations. 49. Paraguay welcomed the adoption of anti-discrimination legislation and measures to fight against extremism, referring to the long-standing history between Roma and the Czech people. It welcomed the changes in the legislation on foreign residency, and the judicial review of administrative decisions on expulsions. Paraguay made recommendations. 50. The Philippines noted the strong commitment of the Government to combat human trafficking. It appreciated the Government’s recognition of the importance of the social integration of foreigners and highlighted that successful integration was crucial to the effective contribution of migrants to the Czech society. The Philippines made recommendations. 51. The Republic of Moldova commended the Czech Republic for adopting the National Strategy for the Protection of the Rights of the Child. It noted with satisfaction the plan for promoting equal opportunities for men and women and the strong commitment to combat human trafficking and developing new policies. The Republic of Moldova made recommendations. 52. The Russian Federation noted with satisfaction the achievements made for the protection of human rights. However, it noted persisting human rights problems. The Russian Federation made recommendations. 53. Rwanda commended the Czech Republic on the extensive consultations that had taken place during the preparation of the national report. Rwanda congratulated the Czech Republic on the progress made in successfully implementing many of the recommendations of the first UPR cycle, and encouraged it to implement the remaining recommendations. Rwanda made recommendations. 54. The Czech Republic stated that equal opportunities for education of Roma children were a fundamental issue to which the Czech Republic gave primary attention. The best interest of the child and his or her quality education were the basic principles of the numerous measures already adopted in that regard. The Czech Republic had applied a whole range of measures to decrease the number of Roma children in so-called practical schools. The report of the Czech School Inspection from June 2012 showed a slight improvement in that regard. The number of Roma children in those schools had decreased by 8.6 per cent since the school year 2009/10, but the existing 26.4 per cent still underlined the need for more action in this field. The Czech Republic provided information on present and future measures it was taking to further improve the equal opportunities in education of Roma children. Such measures were designed to ensure that ethnicity and social backgrounds have no impact on the placement of pupils into education programmes. 55. The Czech Republic stressed the seriousness of human trafficking in a globalized world. Its prevention must be the first step to eradicate that crime. Therefore, the Czech authorities focused on disseminating information to target groups and relevant authorities. A major information campaign against trafficking in human beings targeting the clients of prostitution had been organized between 2007 and 2010. The Czech Republic encouraged people to report cases of forced prostitution. Websites in several languages and telephone hotlines had been launched. Promotion materials were distributed among target groups. Materials on human trafficking and child trafficking had also been distributed among public authorities and the general public. The criminal offence of human trafficking had been extended in the new Criminal Code to implement the Council of Europe conventions and European Union law. Profiting from human trafficking was also criminalized. Children were accorded special protection against human trafficking and sexual exploitation. In both cases, consent of the victim was irrelevant for prosecution. The criminal act of human trafficking was considered an especially serious crime. Accordingly, many special investigative measures were available. Failure to report human trafficking was also a crime. Persons helping victims of trafficking were exempted from that obligation. However, they were encouraged to report such crime, in the interest of the victim. 56. The Czech Republic confirmed that it was firmly committed to fighting organized crime in all its forms. Following the new act on criminal liability of legal persons for crimes committed, legal entities could be held criminally liable and the Czech law was currently in full compliance with OP-CRC-SC; the United Nations Convention on Transnational Organized Crime and its supplementary protocols, namely, the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children (Palermo Protocol) and the Protocol against the Smuggling of Migrants by Land, Sea and Air; and the Council of Europe Convention on Action against Trafficking in Human Beings and Convention on the Protection of Children against Sexual Exploitation and Sexual Abuse. The ratification process was gradually starting and the depositions of the ratification instruments were expected during upcoming years. 57. The Czech Republic acknowledged the importance of equality and anti-discrimination. The most important legal regulation was the Anti-Discrimination Act, adopted in 2009, which prohibited discrimination on the grounds of race, sex, sexual orientation, age, disability and religion in the areas of employment, social security and social benefits, health care, education and access to goods and services. Victims could claim damages in courts and could be represented by specialized NGOs. Equal treatment was also controlled by public authorities who could impose monetary fines on perpetrators of discriminatory acts. Those authorities kept records on cases of discrimination and formulated their plans of work accordingly to focus on the most important areas. The national authority leading the fight against discrimination was the Ombudsman, whose tasks were to help enforce the right to equal treatment, assist discrimination victims, conduct research, publish reports and recommendations on discrimination issues and disseminate information. 58. Slovakia recognized the dedication of the Czech Republic to improving its human rights record and welcomed the adoption of the National Plan of Action for Inclusive Education, the Anti-Discrimination Act, the new Criminal Code and amendments to the Code of Civil Procedure and the Code of Criminal Procedure, as well as the creation of the Agency for Social Inclusion. Slovakia made recommendations.  59. Slovenia welcomed the steps taken since the first UPR, including the adoption of the Anti-Discrimination Act and the new Criminal Code, amendments to the Code of Civil Procedure and new strategies and policy concepts, particularly relating to the rights of the Roma population. Slovenia made recommendations. 60. South Africa welcomed the legislative, institutional and policy measures adopted to implement the accepted recommendations. It recognized that significant challenges remained, particularly in the area of discrimination against minorities, especially Roma, and against migrants and other foreigners. South Africa made recommendations. 61. Spain welcomed the ratification of the Rome Statute in July 2009 and commended the Czech Republic for its active and constructive participation in the Human Rights Council. Spain made recommendations.  62. Sri Lanka welcomed the Government’s efforts to protect the rights of children and the progress made in education. It also praised strategies and policies developed to combat human trafficking and encouraged the Government to intensify those efforts. Sri Lanka made recommendations. 63. Thailand commended efforts to eliminate discrimination against minorities through new legislation and legislative changes. It highlighted the Government’s statement of regret for the identified cases of women whose sterilizations were inconsistent with law and welcomed the measures adopted to prevent their recurrence, provide for compensation and ensure that consent forms are in the Roma language. Thailand made recommendations. 64. Tunisia, noting the progress made in human rights since 2008, including the adoption of the Anti-Discrimination Act, encouraged the Czech Republic to continue its efforts to combat hate crimes and to incite high-level State officials to take a clear stance against hate crimes. It stated that there was no national human rights institution in full compliance with the principles relating to the status of national institutions for the promotion and protection of human rights (Paris Principles). Tunisia made recommendations. 65. Turkey acknowledged the steps taken to promote and protect children’s rights, notably its signing of the Convention on the Rights of the Child. Turkey made recommendations. 66. The United Kingdom welcomed measures to tackle discrimination against minorities and ensure greater Roma representation in Government bodies. It encouraged the Czech Republic to enhance progress by, inter alia, addressing the segregation of Roma children into “special” schools and improving the monitoring of measures to eliminate discrimination on grounds of race, sex or age. The United Kingdom made recommendations. 67. The United States of America remained concerned about the treatment of Roma and other minorities, particularly the unlawful segregation of Roma children into special schools; that socially disadvantaged minorities faced discrimination in housing and employment; and that racism or intolerance sometimes resulted in violence. Furthermore, official corruption hampered economic growth and undermined human rights implementation and faith in public institutions. The United States made recommendations. 68. Uruguay said that the Czech Republic still had some institutional problems and issues with regard to the process of bringing its domestic legislation into line with international standards, as well as the limitations and restrictions imposed on the Roma population, that must be addressed. It pointed out that the current Ombudsman had limited competences, and highlighted the importance of an independent mechanism. Uruguay made recommendations. 69. Uzbekistan noted the persistent violations of human rights and fundamental freedoms in the Czech Republic. It regretted that the recommendation of the Committee on the Rights of the Child that compulsory education should be ensured for children with disabilities had not been implemented due to a lack of resources. It was concerned about racial discrimination and intolerance, and statements of a racist and xenophobic nature. Uzbekistan made recommendations. 70. Algeria noted steps taken to combat racism and racial discrimination and the criminalization of racially or ethnically motivated violence. Algeria echoed concerns about the decision by the Czech Republic not to develop a national action plan against racism and regretted the rejection of the recommendation to ratify the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families, and encouraged a review of that position. Algeria made recommendations. 71. Argentina congratulated the Czech Republic on the creation of the National Plan of Action for Inclusive Education and on the ratification of CRPD. Argentina made recommendations. 72. Armenia supported all measures adopted to enforce individual rights and freedoms, particularly relating to integrating foreigners and protecting human rights defenders at home and abroad. It welcomed the new Criminal Code, the Strategy for Combating Extremism to tackle racism and neo-Nazism, the adoption of the Anti-Discrimination Act and the Crime Prevention Strategy. Armenia made recommendations. 73. Australia applauded the adoption of the Anti-Discrimination Act and the National Plan of Action for Inclusive Education. However, it remained concerned by reports that Roma children continued to experience systematic discrimination in accessing education. It encouraged the Czech Republic to continue implementing measures to remove discrimination against ethnic minorities, including the Roma community. Australia made recommendations. 74. Austria wondered whether the racially motivated violent public demonstrations of 2011 in Northern Bohemia had been fully investigated and the perpetrators held accountable. It shared concerns about the segregation of Roma children in education. It asked whether the Czech Republic would establish a mechanism to evaluate its national strategy on human trafficking and ratify the Palermo Protocol and the Council of Europe Convention Action against Trafficking in Human Beings. Austria made recommendations. 75. Bangladesh welcomed legislative changes to protect children’s rights, and institutional initiatives on social inclusion. It urged the Czech Republic to ensure that hate crime, violence, racism and xenophobia were investigated and the perpetrators prosecuted. It was concerned about the exploitation of migrant workers, the ill-treatment of foreigners in prisons and the segregation of Roma children. Bangladesh made recommendations. 76. Belarus highlighted the concerns of treaty bodies about the use of torture and ill-treatment in prisons, medical and psychiatric facilities, discrimination against Roma, human trafficking, domestic and sexual violence, degrading conditions in detention centres for asylum seekers, and the atmosphere of impunity, particularly within the police and prison service. Belarus made recommendations. 77. Belgium highlighted measures adopted to improve minority rights, including establishing a network of regional coordinators for Roma affairs, the Agency for Social Inclusion and the drafting of a handbook on homophobia. It welcomed the adoption of the new Crime Prevention Strategy, including a component on combating discriminatory and xenophobic stereotypes through campaigns aimed especially at youth. Belgium made recommendations. 78. Brazil praised the institutionalization of the Agency for Social Inclusion of Roma communities and the establishment of criteria for the informed consent of women prior to sterilization. It recognized efforts against trafficking in persons. It was concerned at the challenges still faced by the Roma people and at the arbitrary approach of migration authorities towards foreigners, including racial profiling. Brazil made recommendations. 79. Bulgaria commended the implementation of all accepted recommendations of the first UPR and the ratification of many international human rights instruments. It asked what specific measures had been identified for the next two years to fully implement the National Strategy for the Protection of the Rights of the Child by 2015. 80. Cambodia praised efforts to address political, economic and social challenges, particularly in combating social exclusion and human trafficking and protecting children’s rights. It welcomed the ratification of a number of important international human rights and humanitarian instruments, the enactment of legislation on punishment for crimes and human trafficking, and the adoption of the Strategy on Policing Minorities. Cambodia made a recommendation. 81. Canada requested information on progress made in implementing the recommendations to enact comprehensive anti-discrimination legislation and to develop effective measures to eliminate multiple forms of discrimination. It welcomed the many legislative changes to strengthen the protection of human rights and freedoms, but was concerned that measures to address the segregation of Roma children in education were not being consistently applied. Canada made recommendations. 82. Chad noted with satisfaction that the Czech Republic had accepted 29 of the 30 recommendations during the first UPR cycle and that it was a party to most international human rights instruments. However, it asked how legislation specifically ensured that patients enjoyed rights and status equal to those of health workers. 83. China was deeply concerned over continued acts of racism, xenophobia and the deteriorating human rights situation of minority groups, such as Roma. Violence against the Roma community had continued unabated and Roma had suffered discrimination in many areas, including education, employment and housing. Anti-Roma contents had even been found in primary school teaching materials. China made recommendations. 84. Costa Rica welcomed the significant steps made in human rights, especially in combating violence against children, including providing specialized training for the judiciary. While it welcomed the establishment of the Office of the Ombudsman, it pointed out that the Office was not in accordance with the Paris Principles, and urged the Czech Republic to rectify the situation. Costa Rica made recommendations. 85. Cuba shared concerns about discrimination against minority groups, particularly Roma, and persistent displays of racism and xenophobia and associated violence. It lamented the failure to prohibit organizations that incited racial discrimination. It was also concerned at reports of prison overcrowding, which had led to an increase in violence among prisoners and suicides. Cuba made recommendations. 86. Cyprus welcomed efforts to integrate foreigners, combat racism, protect children’s rights and address the situation of socially excluded Roma. It asked about the intention of the Czech Republic to improve women’s opportunities in the labour market and their participation in policy- and decision-making, and whether the victims of violence and rape had access to legal aid and exercised their right to compensation. 87. The Czech Republic underlined that it considered the integration of the Roma minority as one of its principal goals. The Roma Integration Concept for 2010–2013 and the Strategy to Combat Social Exclusion 2012–2015 were the main documents and included comprehensive integrative measures in relevant areas. The implementation of those measures was assessed annually in a report prepared by the Government Commissioner for Human Rights. The main platform for Roma participation was the Government Council for Roma Minority Affairs, which is composed of Government ministers and deputy ministers and Roma representatives on a parity level. In addition, the Agency for Social Inclusion was a Government expert body helping with social inclusion on the local level. Each of the 14 regional governments employed a regional Roma coordinator and there were also 164 Roma counsellors in municipalities. 88. The Czech Republic fully recognized the right of individuals to control and decide on matters of their own sexuality and reproductive health. The Ombudsman reported in 2006, however, that there had been individual cases in which the procedure prescribed by law had not been followed properly. In 2009, the Government officially expressed its regret for past sterilizations performed contrary to the legal regulation, and it committed to adopt measures to prevent their reoccurrence. New legislation, in effect since 2012, reinforced the guarantees of patients’ rights with respect to free and informed consent. The Government was presently considering a proposal to establish a non-judicial mechanism that could complement the existing judicial means by providing a possibility to award compensation ex gratia. A new complex set of rules which should facilitate access to legal aid was also being considered. 89. The Czech Republic condemned xenophobia and racist violence. In 2008–2009 there was a resurgence of right-wing extremists, who focused their hatred mostly on Roma. The Government responded firmly to this phenomenon. The criminal law enabled the prosecution of racist and hate attacks and speech. Problems could be encountered in practice in relation to proving hate motivation of the offender. In response, police and prosecutors had received specialized training and had access to a database of relevant information. The most visible hate crime was an arson attack committed against a Roma family. The investigation was successful and all offenders received heavy penalties. The Government also successfully proposed banning the extremist Workers’ Party. The Supreme Administrative Court established in that case clear criteria for dissolving parties for extremist propaganda while respecting freedom of association. The success in those highly visible cases had a serious impact on the extremist scene. Its principal drivers had been paralysed or significantly weakened. Subsequently, the focus shifted to preventive tools, such as training of law enforcement officials, preventive programmes and maintaining public order in socially excluded neighbourhoods. 90. The Czech Republic reported on the governmental campaign against racism, which had provided, since 2006, grants to NGOs on projects aimed at tackling prejudices and stereotypes, raising awareness against intolerance and extremist activities, and presenting examples of best practices and positive Roma role models. Moreover in 2009 and 2010, the “Gypsy Spirit” prize had been awarded to present the efforts and achievements of persons contributing to the development of Roma or the Roma culture and identity. Recently, in response to the social challenges, the Commissioner for Human Rights had initiated an action plan to synchronize future steps of all relevant stakeholders to deal with similar confrontations. Furthermore, an anti-racist campaign entitled “Hate-Free Culture” was being prepared, which was adapted to the communication of young people and aimed at creating a community that would be active in intercultural dialogue and the fight against hate violence. 91. The Czech Republic also referred to the newly adopted National Strategy for the Protection of the Rights of the Child, which focused on the best interest of the child as a crucial principle of all State activities. The Strategy strengthened coordination and cooperation among public administration bodies involved in the protection of children at risk under the lead of the Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs; defined basic principles of protection of children’s rights; included goals and activities, with a timetable, monitoring and evaluation; and ensured that activities of all relevant subjects comply with the Convention on the Rights of the Child. The Strategy also focused on promoting the quality of life of children and families, eliminating discrimination against children and providing support for the development of children in their family or in substitute family care. The latter would be strictly prioritized over institutional care. 92. The Czech Republic stated that the principle of equal opportunities for women and men had become an integral part of both internal and foreign policy. The prohibition of discrimination on the ground of sex was included in the Charter of Fundamental Rights and Freedoms and in the Anti-Discrimination Act. The equal position of both genders would be achieved only through consistent application of the anti-discrimination legislation. Furthermore, the Government recognized the negative role of gender stereotypes and the underrepresentation of women in decision-making processes. Therefore, the education of the whole society as regards the issue of gender equality and tolerance was another important feature of the Government policy, along with the systematic implementation of gender mainstreaming within the whole State governance. 93. The Czech Republic concluded by announcing its pledge to submit an interim progress report to the Human Rights Council on the implementation of the UPR recommendations.  II. Conclusions and/or recommendations**  ** Conclusions and recommendations have not been edited. 94. The following recommendations will be examined by the Czech Republic, which will provide responses in due time, but no later than the twenty-second session of the Human Rights Council in March 2013. The response of the Czech Republic to these recommendations will be included in the outcome report adopted by the Council at its twenty-second session: 94.1. Ratify the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (Spain); 94.2. Consider an early ratification of the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the Sale of Children, Child Prostitution and Child Pornography (OP-CRC-SC) (Malaysia)/Consider ratifying the OP-CRC-SC (Rwanda); 94.3. Sign and ratify the OP-CRC-SC (Egypt, Kyrgyzstan)/ Ratify the OP-CRC-SC (Greece, Tunisia, Spain, Uruguay)/ Ratify the OP-CRC-SC with a view to providing better implementation to the Convention on the Rights of the Child (Turkey)/ Expedite the ratification of the OP-CRC-SC (India)/Ratify the OP-CRC-SC and offer quality psychological support to child victims of sexual exploitation (Belgium); 94.4. Enact the necessary legislation in view of its ratification of the OP-CRC-SC (Lichtenstein); 94.5. Consider an early ratification of the third optional protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on a communication procedure (Slovakia); 94.6. Consider ratifying the International Convention on the Rights of Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families (ICRMW) (Philippines)/Reconsider the ratification of the ICRMW in the future (Indonesia); 94.7. Sign and ratify the ICRMW (Egypt)/ Ratify the ICRMW (Turkey)/ Ratify the ICRMW recognising the compulsory jurisdiction of the monitoring body to receive individual complaints (Uruguay); 94.8. Consider the possible signature and ratification of the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance (CPED) (Armenia)/ Continue its efforts aimed at ratifying the CPED (Argentina); 94.9. Become a party to the CPED (Iraq) /Ratify the CPED (France, Spain)/Ratify the CPED recognizing the compulsory jurisdiction of the Committee to receive individual complaints (Uruguay); 94.10. Proceed with the ratification of the Optional Protocol to the Convention of the Rights of Persons with the Disabilities (CRPD) (Estonia)/Ratify the Optional Protocol to the CRPD (Austria, Spain); 94.11. Consider ratifying the Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and its Protocol (Philippines); 94.12. Ratify the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and its Optional Protocols and accord appropriate legal status to the provisions of the Convention within domestic legislation (Libya); 94.13. Consider the ratification of the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, especially Women and Children (Rwanda); 94.14. Sign and ratify the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, especially Women and Children (Egypt)/Ratify the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children, supplementing the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime (Tunisia); 94.15. Ratify the Palermo Protocol and the ILO Conventions no. 169 and 189 (Belarus); 94.16. Consider ratifying ILO Convention 189 (Philippines); 94.17. Ratify the Kampala amendments to the Rome Statute with a view to contributing to the activation of the jurisdiction of the International Criminal Court over the crime of aggression in 2017 (Lichtenstein); 94.18. Review its national legislation with a view to bringing the definition of torture in line with the Convention against torture (CAT) (Egypt); 94.19. Complete the process of aligning national legislation with its obligations under the Rome Statute and the CAT (Tunisia); 94.20. Complete the process of the national legislation’s full alignment with all obligations under the Rome Statute (Slovakia); 94.21. Sign and ratify the Council of Europe Convention on Action against Trafficking in Human Beings and the Palermo Protocol (Austria)/ Sign and ratify the Council of Europe Convention on Action against Trafficking in Human Beings (Ireland); 94.22. Ratify the Council of Europe Convention on the Protection of Children against Sexual Exploitation and Abuse, as a member of the European family (Turkey); 94.23. Effectively implement the 2009 anti-discrimination law, especially regarding the treatment of complaints about discrimination (France); 94.24. Take steps to eliminate discriminatory practices in housing and employment to fully comply with the 2009 Anti-Discrimination Act (United States of America); 94.25. Include in its national legislation a clear definition of child pornography and review legislation with a view to criminalizing child prostitution, including the adoption of a victim-oriented approach towards children victims of sexual exploitation (Egypt); 94.26. Enact legislation contained in the National Anti-Corruption Strategy (United States of America); 94.27. Establish a national human rights institution (Canada); 94.28. Continue working on establishing human rights institutions in accordance with the Paris Principles (Jordan); 94.29. Ratify the OP-CRC-SC and take necessary measures aiming at the accreditation of the Public Defender of Rights of Citizens by the International Coordinating Committee of National Institutions (Algeria); 94.30. Establish an independent human rights institution which fully complies with the Paris Principles (Malaysia)/Establish an independent national human rights institution in compliance with the Paris Principles (Uruguay)/ Establish a national human rights institution in line with the Paris Principles (Turkey)/Establish the national human rights institution in accordance with the Paris Principles (Rwanda)/Promptly establish a national human rights institution in full compliance with the Paris Principles (Tunisia)/ Bring the Ombudsman institution in line with the Paris Principles (Russian Federation); 94.31. Strengthen the mandate of the Ombudsman to review administrative decisions and align it with the Paris Principles (Hungary); 94.32. Consider the creation of an Ombudsman for children’s rights in order to further enhance the status of children (Ireland); 94.33. Continue with all its endeavours to ensure further success in the implementation of the recently established relevant programmes/policies on human rights, especially the efforts in the continued implementation of the social agenda of minorities (Cambodia); 94.34. Increase efforts to protect the rights of vulnerable groups, particularly women and children (Iraq); 94.35. Continue its policies on improving the rights of the child (Jordan); 94.36. Step up its efforts to ensure the implementation of the First Plan of Action for the National Strategy for the Protection of the Rights of Child 2012 – 2015 (Indonesia); 94.37. Fully implement the National Strategy for the Protection of the Rights of the Child through plans of action (Republic of Moldova); 94.38. Review the recent national strategy for the protection of rights of children and take into account the concerns and recommendations made during the second UPR cycle in this regard (Nicaragua); 94.39. Take into account the resolutions approved by the Council, which covers a series of important issues and offers significant recommendations to promote and protect the rights of children (Nicaragua); 94.40. Continue the implementation of the Crime Prevention Strategy plan, which fosters the peaceful coexistence of the society members and ethnic minorities (Armenia); 94.41. Issue, as a matter of priority, an invitation for the Special Rapporteurs on torture, human trafficking, migrants, and for the Independent Expert on the minority issues (Belarus); 94.42. Implement measures to give effect to the existing legislation on the elimination of discrimination, particularly in the area of gender and ethnic minorities and eradicate all forms of violence due to discrimination (Costa Rica); 94.43. Adopt concrete measures to fight discrimination against women in all spheres of life, especially by increasing the representation of women in the middle and higher positions of political and economic life (Slovenia); 94.44. Make efforts to overcome gender stereotyping, which continues to perpetuate discrimination against women, and increase representation of women, including Roma women in the legislative bodies, the Government and the public administration, particularly in senior positions (Cuba); 94.45. Address more the deep-rooted gender stereotypes that perpetuated discrimination against women (Palestine); 94.46. Implement CEDAW recommendation to address the persistent and deep-rooted gender stereotypes that perpetuate discrimination against women (South Africa); 94.47. Further strengthen the temporary special measures in areas in which women are underrepresented (Republic of Moldova); 94.48. Develop a national action plan against racism in line with the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action (Egypt); 94.49. Develop a national plan against racism in line with the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action and investigate the perpetrators of hate crime (Turkey); 94.50. Adopt a national action plan to combat racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and intolerance (Tunisia); 94.51. Formulate a national plan of action to combat racism and xenophobia (China); 94.52. Adopt a comprehensive national action plan on the prevention of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and intolerance as recommended by the Committee on the Rights of the Child (Algeria); 94.53. Develop a comprehensive national action plan to combat and prevent racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and intolerance in accordance with the Durban Agreements (Cuba); 94.54. Develop a national action plan to prevent and combat racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance, which will also ensure that manifestations of hatred, racist and xenophobic discourse as well as racially motivated acts of violence are investigated and perpetrators are punished. Such a national action plan should also integrate the implementation of the Durban Declaration and Program of Action (South Africa); 94.55. Take steps to prevent acts of racially motivated violence and discrimination, including through education and awareness campaigns, ensuring effective interventions by law enforcement and ensuring the successful prosecution of those that commit such crimes (Canada); 94.56. Ban organizations that incite hatred, racism, racial discrimination and xenophobia (Cuba); 94.57. Intensify efforts in eliminating all forms of discrimination against ethnic minorities and in this regard seriously implement the national legal and policy framework on anti-discrimination (Malaysia); 94.58. Increase all efforts to combat all forms of intolerance, racism, xenophobia and take further measures and policies to combat racist manifestations, in particular against Roma (Turkey); 94.59. Continue its combat against hate crime and all forms of discrimination against minorities in accordance with international standards and its human rights obligations and to bring perpetrators to justice (Thailand); 94.60. Take further legislative measures and policies to combat racist manifestations, in particular against Roma, including in the media and in the political arena (Iran (Islamic Republic of)); 94.61. Address the issue of hate crime and racist and xenophobic discourse (Slovenia); 94.62. Continue pursuing appropriate, efficient policies in combating acts of extremism and xenophobia such as the Strategy for Combating Extremism or the Crime and Extremism Prevention Programme “Dawn” (Slovakia); 94.63. Take all necessary measures to prevent any kind of reappearance of Nazism in order to eradicate the root cause of all racially motivated criminal acts (Democratic People’s Republic of Korea); 94.64. Intensify its work to combat manifestations of neo-Nazism, extremism, racism, xenophobia and anti-Semitism in view of an increase of such acts in the past years (Russian Federation); 94.65. Increase its legal efforts to combat all forms of intolerance, racism, and xenophobia, particularly the implementation of legal provisions of hate crime that remains inadequate for Roma (Iran (Islamic Republic of)); 94.66. Ensure that hate crime and violence, racist and xenophobic discourse are investigated, and that the perpetrators are prosecuted (Bangladesh); 94.67. Set up national mechanisms to monitor, investigate, prosecute and punish incitement to and acts of hatred, intolerance, racism and xenophobia, including hate speech and racist and xenophobic acts committed on the internet and through political platform (Egypt); 94.68. Take appropriate measures to ensure that hate crime and violence, and racist and xenophobic acts are investigated, and that perpetrators are prosecuted (Sri Lanka); 94.69. Ensure that hate crimes, acts of violence, racist and xenophobic views are investigated and that the perpetrators of these crimes are brought to justice (Tunisia) 94.70. Ensure that detailed investigations are carried out in respect to hate crimes and violence, and racist and xenophobic speeches, as well as ensure that perpetrators are brought to justice (Uzbekistan); 94.71. Establish dedicated mechanisms for the provision of remedies to victims of racial discrimination and facilitate their access to the justice system, and to ensure the reporting of hate crimes (Egypt); 94.72. Step up efforts of the competent Ministries to effectively train professionals such as judges, prosecutors and police officers to prosecute racist and hate crimes (Belgium); 94.73. Stop and redress the violation of Roma children’s rights to education and freedom from discrimination in policy, law and practice to ensure that anti-discrimination policies can be effectively implemented in practice (Iran (Islamic Republic of)); 94.74. Take necessary measures aimed at eliminating all discriminatory treatment on the basis of sexual orientation or gender identity (Argentina); 94.75. Work towards the equal status of same sex couples starting with legal recognition of same sex couples (Netherlands); 94.76. Allow NGOs and other actors to bring discrimination cases to court in order to secure increased access to justice for victims of discrimination (Norway); 94.77. Investigate all allegations on the use of torture and cruel treatment by law enforcement officers, hold the perpetrators legally responsible and provide compensation to victims (Belarus); 94.78. Adopt effective measures to address the problem of overcrowding of the penitentiary centres and ensure adequate conditions for detainees (Uzbekistan); 94.79. Adopt measures to reduce overcrowding in penitentiary centres (Cuba); 94.80. Consider to review the three-year time limit in the statute of limitations for bringing compensation claims in cases of coercive or non-consensual sterilizations in order to extend it (Greece); 94.81. Establish a roadmap with clear timelines to finalise the cases of sterilization of Roma women without consent and ensure adequate compensation and reparation for such women (South Africa); 94.82. Adopt measures to ensure the payment of compensations to victims of forced sterilization (Spain); 94.83. Continue efforts to eliminate human trafficking and promote the protection of victims (Costa Rica); 94.84. Ensure that all victims of trafficking regardless of their migration status have access to and benefit from programmes that provide support, rehabilitation and assistance (Mexico); 94.85. Continue to strengthen Government policies to ensure children are not exploited or trafficked (Namibia); 94.86. Provide capacity-building to law enforcement officials on the identification of child victims of commercial sexual exploitation and on measures to protect children from commercial sexual exploitation (Lichtenstein); 94.87. Provide capacity-building to law enforcement officials as well as workers on the identification of child victims of commercial sexual exploitation and on measures to protect children from commercial sexual exploitation, for instance, child-friendly procedures within the justice system (Iran (Islamic Republic of)); 94.88. Take measures to combat domestic violence, in particular against children, including the usage of corporal punishment (Russian Federation); 94.89. Explicitly prohibit all corporal punishment of children in all settings, including in the home (Lichtenstein); 94.90. Explicitly prohibit corporal punishment of children in all settings (Hungary); 94.91. Develop more effective programmes to support families, care institutions and foster families by paying special attention to the rights of children and adolescents (Russian Federation); 94.92. Further educate and train the appropriate professional groups to raise awareness among the vulnerable groups and establish cooperation with additional institutions and organizations, namely as regards worker exploitation (Republic of Moldova); 94.93. Expedite the adoption of a social housing policy that will include the most vulnerable segments of society, such as minorities, in particular Roma as well as persons who live in conditions of extreme poverty, persons with disabilities, migrants and refugees (South Africa); 94.94. Continue its efforts at all Government levels to give women of all ages access to all information and all services necessary to take informed  decisions based on their needs regarding reproductive health (Paraguay); 94.95. Confirm the commitment by the Ministry of Education to implement the National Action Plan for Inclusive Education (Palestine); 94.96. Take measures to ensure the effective implementation of the National Action Plan for Inclusive Education (NAPIE) by ensuring that adequate funding is made available and that concrete targets are set to ensure that all children, including Roma, are provided with equal access and equal opportunity to education (Canada); 94.97. Undertake appropriate measures in the education sphere to further focus on the effective integration and development of disadvantaged children (Sri Lanka); 94.98. Take appropriate steps to ensure inclusive education in Czech schools. (Norway); 94.99. Redouble its efforts in the comprehensive implementation of the National Plan of Action for Inclusive Education (Indonesia); 94.100. Fully implement the 2010 National Action Plan for Inclusive Education by mainstreaming Romani students whenever possible (United States of America); 94.101. That the Ministry of Education fully implement the National Plan of Action for Inclusive Education for Roma children in school (Belgium); 94.102. Fully implement the National Plan of Action for Inclusive Education and eliminate practices that lead to the continued segregation of Roma children at school, redouble efforts to remedy all shortcomings faced by Roma children in the field of education (Kyrgyzstan); 94.103. Implement effectively the National Action Plan for Inclusive Education, including by making available adequate human and financial resources, and strengthen it by developing a concrete timeline with clear targets to put an end to the segregation of Roma children within the mainstream system (Denmark); 94.104. Ensure prompt and effective implementation of the NAPIE and other strategies and action plans relevant to the full realization of the rights of Roma children by, inter alia, making available the necessary human and other resources and setting clear, measurable and ambitious targets for transfers of children to ordinary education and for overall de-segregation of the school system (Finland); 94.105. Seek to ensure full participation of the Roma themselves in these efforts (Finland); 94.106. Promote the integration of Roma children in the educational system under the same conditions as the other children (Spain); 94.107. As part of its efforts to achieve inclusive education for Roma, take measures necessary to include students and teachers from the specialised education system into the regular system (Mexico); 94.108. Increase efforts for the efficient implementation of the right to education of members of the Roma minority, as recommended by the Committee on the Rights of the Child and Council of Europe’s Commissioner for Human Rights (Slovenia); 94.109. Reinforce its programmes to include Roma girls in the mainstream education (Bangladesh); 94.110. Continue with measures to remove discrimination and segregation of Romani pupils, including by ensuring effective implementation of its National Action Plan for Inclusive Education (Australia); 94.111. Effectively eliminate segregation of Roma within the education system, inter alia, by fully and swiftly implementing the National Action Plan for Inclusive Education aiming at addressing issues identified by the European Court for Human Rights (Austria); 94.112. Revise criteria for enrolment into special schools thus avoiding the enrolment of Roma children in special schools without due recommendation of education and psychology professionals (Brazil); 94.113. Fund and implement a single plan and timeline with clear annual targets aimed at eliminating school segregation for Roma children and ensuring inclusive education (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland); 94.114. Ensure effective access of children with disabilities to compulsory education, including through the legal amendments to prohibit the denial of access to education for those children because of limited material and other resources (Uzbekistan); 94.115. Continue its efforts to provide minority and migrant boys and girls the best possible access to the general education that benefits all citizens of the country (Paraguay); 94.116. Develop and adopt legislation in the area of protection of the rights of migrants, refugees, asylum seekers and stateless persons in accordance with relevant international standards (Belarus); 94.117. Take appropriate action to ensure the protection of migrant workers (Sri Lanka); 94.118. Ensure the protection for migrant workers, especially from exploitation and ill-treatment (Bangladesh); 94.119. Establish guidelines on the procedure to be followed to ensure that foreigners with no legal residency can request judicial review of the administrative expulsion orders (Mexico); 94.120. Consider the recommendation of UNHCR to review legal provisions of the proposed amendments on detention to ensure that asylum seekers, including adolescents and children, and families with children are not detained (Uzbekistan); 94.121. Prioritize respect of the cultural diversity of Roma and integrate it into social policies of the Czech Republic (Libya); 94.122. Continue adopting measures to combat discrimination and protect the rights of ethnic minorities, particularly Roma (Argentina); 94.123. Continue to undertake measures to remove discrimination against ethnic minorities, including those recommended by the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination in September 2011 (Australia); 94.124. Further strengthen its policies and programmes aimed at combating discrimination and intolerance and ensure that incidents are subject to prompt and independent investigation and effective prosecution (Austria); 94.125. Measurably improve access to the legal system for Roma and other groups facing discrimination and carry out a campaign to increase awareness among these minorities of their rights and means of redress when infringement occurs (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland); 94.126. Adopt effective measure to combat violence against Roma (China); 94.127. Continue promoting and protecting the rights of minorities by fully integrating minorities in all socio-economic aspects in addition to education, medical service and employment (Thailand); 94.128. Acknowledge the harm done to the victims of discrimination against Roma, bring the perpetrators to justice and provide reparations to the victims (Democratic People’s Republic of Korea); 94.129. Continue to improve the situation of the Roma people (Namibia); 94.130. In relation to the Roma community adopt legislative and practical measures to combat discrimination against the members of this community guaranteeing the effective exercise of their rights (Spain); 94.131. Provide effective guarantee for the rights of Roma in the fields of education, employment and housing (China); 94.132. Adopt effective measures such as the establishment of an institution to monitor regularly the situation of Roma (Democratic People’s Republic of Korea); 94.133. Step up efforts to raise awareness through campaigns or other concrete initiatives in order to promote understanding and tolerance toward the Roma minority in the Czech society (Denmark); 94.134. Continue its efforts to give minority populations the greatest level of participation in decision-making and public policy options, particularly in local governments where they live as part of the community (Paraguay); 94.135. Establish affirmative actions for members of Roma communities, including by considering reserving vacancies at universities and at the public service (Brazil); 94.136. Conduct, jointly with the Special Procedures of the Human Rights Council, comprehensive and transparent investigations in respect to reported involvement of Czech authorities in secret programmes of CIA on arbitrary detention and secret displacement/transfer of suspects (Belarus). 95. All conclusions and/or recommendations contained in the present report reflect the position of the submitting State(s) and/or the State under review. They should not be construed as endorsed by the Working Group as a whole. Annex [English only]   Composition of the delegation  The delegation of the Czech Republic was headed by H. E. Mr. Vladimír Galu.ka, Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs and composed of the following members: • Ms. Kate.ina Sequensová, Permanent Representative, Permanent Mission of the Czech Republic; • Ms. Monika .im.nková, Government Commissioner for Human Rights, Office of the Government; • Mr. Jakub Macha.ka, Office of the Government, Government Council for Human Rights; • Mr. Martin Martínek, Office of the Government, Government Council for Roma Minority Affairs; • Mr. Ferdinand Polák, Deputy Minister of Health, Ministry of Health; • Mr. Jan Pila., Department of Health Care, Ministry of Health; • Mr. Jakub Stárek, Director for Department of Education System, Ministry of Education, Youth and Sports; • Ms. Helena Li.uchová, Acting Head of the International Cooperation Department, Ministry of Justice; • Ms. Eva Hrubá, Legislative Department, Ministry of Justice; • Mr. Miroslav Fuchs, Director, Department for EU and International Cooperation, Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs; • Mr. Pavel Jane.ek, Head of the International Cooperation Unit, Department for EU and International Cooperation, Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs; • Mr. Tomá. Urubek, Head of Unit for International Relations and Information on Countries of Origin, Department for Asylum and Migration Policy, Ministry of the Interior; • Mr. Petr Habarta, Security Policy Department, Ministry of the Interior; • Ms. Martina .muclerová, Adviser, Human Rights and Transition Policy Department, Ministry of Foreign Affairs; • Ms. Veronika Strom.íková, Deputy Permanent Representative, Permanent Mission of the Czech Republic; • Mr. Patrick Rumlar, Second Secretary, Permanent Mission of the Czech Republic; and • Ms. Zuzana Stiborová, Third Secretary, Permanent Mission of the Czech Republic.     