United Nations 	A/HRC/14/12 Distr.: General General Assembly 15 March 2010 Original: English Human Rights Council Fourteenth session Agenda item 6 Universal Periodic Review Report of the Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review* Islamic Republic of Iran * 	Previously issued under document symbol A/HRC/WG.6/7/L.11; minor revisions have been added under the authority of the secretariat of the Human Rights Council on the basis of editorial changes made by States through the ad referendum procedure. The annex to the present report is circulated as received. Contents Paragraphs Page Introduction............................................................................................................. 1–4 3 
I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process................................................ 5–89 3 
A. Presentation by the State under review........................................................... 5–17 3 
B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review........................ 18–89 5 
II. Conclusions and/or recommendations..................................................................... 90–93 13 Annex Composition of the delegation ......................................................................................................... 26 Introduction 1. The Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review, established in accordance with Human Rights Council resolution 5/1 of 18 June 2007, held its seventh session from 8 to 19 February 2010.  The review of the Islamic Republic of Iran was held at the 11th meeting, on 15 February 2010. The delegation of Iran was headed by the Secretary General of the High Council for Human Rights, Judiciary, Mohammad Javad Larijani. At its meeting held on 17 February 2010, the Working Group adopted the report on Iran. 2. On 7 September 2009, the Human Rights Council selected the following group of rapporteurs (troika) to facilitate the review of Iran: Mexico, Pakistan and Senegal. 3. In accordance with paragraph 15 of the annex to resolution 5/1, the following documents were issued for the review of Iran: (a) A national report submitted/written presentation made in accordance with paragraph 15 (a) (A/HRC/WG.6/7/IRN/1); (b) A compilation prepared by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) in accordance with paragraph 15 (b) (A/HRC/WG.6/7/IRN/2); (c) A summary prepared by OHCHR in accordance with paragraph 15 (c) (A/HRC/WG.6/7/IRN/3).  4. A list of questions was prepared in advance by Argentina, Belgium, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Germany, Ireland, Japan, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, the Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Sweden and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and was transmitted to the Islamic Republic of Iran through the troika. Those questions are available on the extranet of the universal periodic review. I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process A. Presentation by the State under review 5. Welcoming the review of the Islamic Republic of Iran as an opportunity to enhance knowledge about the situation of human rights in the country, the delegation of Iran remarked that it was through cooperation, respect and a willingness to listen to one another that a culture of human rights could be promoted. 6. The delegation noted that the 1979 Islamic Revolution had led to the creation of a new system of democratic polity and social and civil order based on Islamic rationality. It underscored explicit and extensive human rights references in the Constitution, such as chapter 7, on “The right of people”. Article 6 provides that all major decisions on all matters, including representation in high office, should be based on the people’s consent. It noted that the judiciary was independent from the executive and legislative branches, with the requisite principles to ensure due process. 7. In 2005, the High Council of Human Rights, established in 2001 to improve coordination, became the highest institution entrusted with supervision, monitoring and guidance of different sections on human rights. 8. The delegation noted the country’s diverse ethnic and religious composition and the variety of traditions, customs and languages that made it a model of brotherly and amicable coexistence. In order to nurture that relationship and ensure that all nationals enjoyed the same infrastructure for growth, projects aimed at job creation, providing health services, education and housing, and promoting the civil and political rights of ethnic communities had been developed to improve economic, social and cultural indicators in less developed areas. 9. With regard to the challenges facing Iran, the delegation stated that its human rights situation had consistently been used by some Western countries to apply political pressure and advance ulterior political motives. Terrorism supported by foreign countries constituted a serious problem. Following the invasion of its neighbouring countries, the presence and operations of terrorist groups in Iran’s border areas had increased considerably, and terrorist groups had killed, threatened or abducted thousands of ordinary citizens and had proceeded to plunder public and private property. 10. The delegation added that, after the invasion of Afghanistan by coalition forces, narcotic drug production and trafficking had drastically increased, posing a serious security and health threat. It expressed regret at the fact that the country’s efforts to prevent drug trafficking had not received recognition or financial or technical support. 11. The delegation also underlined the negative impact on the realization of all aspects of human rights of unilateral and coercive as well as international sanctions, imposed by certain Western countries and the Security Council, respectively. 12. The Iranian delegation stressed its continuous and full cooperation with OHCHR and the extension of a standing invitation to all thematic special procedures. Several Special Rapporteurs had visited the country, with further visits under consideration. Iran had made thorough and timely responses to communications by mandate holders. Reports to several treaty bodies had been submitted in a timely manner, and concluding observations had been disseminated. 13. The Islamic Republic of Iran highlighted the contributions it had made in human rights forums, including to standard-setting and literature, and emphasized the significance of an interactive and cooperative approach and the avoidance of confrontation, double standards and politicization. 14. The delegation underscored Iran’s contribution to three General Assembly resolutions, entitled “Enhancement of international cooperation in the field of human rights”, “Human rights and unilateral coercive measures” and “Human rights and cultural diversity”.  15. Similarly, the 2007 Ministerial Conference of the Non-Aligned Movement on Human Rights and Cultural Diversity and the establishment of the Centre for Human Rights and Cultural Diversity had created a framework for promoting respect for cultural diversity and institutionalizing intercultural dialogue on human rights. 16. On the national level, the delegation cited the role of the Iranian parliament in promoting human rights through legislation and the establishment of new programmes. It also cited the human rights structures of parliament as described in Iran’s national report. Among the issues addressed by recent legislative acts of parliament, the delegation cited, inter alia, citizenship rights; the rights of women and children, religious and ethnic minorities and disabled persons; freedom of expression; human trafficking; and social security. Programmes and laws currently under consideration were related to issues including the protection of children, young adults and victims of crime, judicial reform and criminal law reform. 17. The delegation also noted that women held eight parliamentary seats and that two vice-presidents, several presidential advisers, one minister and several deputy ministers were female.  B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review 18. During the interactive dialogue, 53 delegations made statements. Additional statements that could not be delivered during the dialogue owing to time constraints are posted on the extranet of the universal periodic review when available. A number of delegations thanked Iran for its national report and its presentation. Recommendations made during the dialogue are found in section II of the present report. 19. The United States expressed concern at the human rights situation, including detentions following the 2009 elections; restrictions on freedom of expression; the situation of detainees, including foreign nationals and United States citizens; and violations of religious freedom. It made reference to the situation facing Shi’a and Baha’i, as well as Sufi Muslims.   20. Canada noted that education and welfare programmes had improved living standards. It was seriously concerned about the deterioration in the human rights situation and violent crackdowns by security forces, especially since the 2009 elections. Peaceful public demonstrations had been met with repression, including arbitrary arrest, detention without due process, ill treatment and torture, deaths in custody, and restrictions on the freedoms of expression, assembly and association.  21. France expressed concern at the fact that the human rights situation had deteriorated over the previous eight months and at the repression of people peacefully exercising their rights. It noted that dozens had been killed and thousands imprisoned since the elections, also noting reports of torture and rape. Concern was expressed at the increase in the number of executions. 22. Slovenia cited the situation of writers and journalists in jail and the conditions facing ethnic and religious minorities, particularly the Baha’i, and asked if Iran intended to prevent the further harassment and intimidation of Baha’i, particularly children. It condemned the increasing recourse to death sentences and executions in connection with the post-election protests.  23. Israel noted Iran’s large-scale and escalating attacks on Iranian citizens. It noted that women, minorities and their defenders were being discriminated against. It noted that there was no freedom of expression, assembly or religion. Israel added that the Council’s work on Iran ought to go beyond the present review. 24. Australia was concerned at the use of capital punishment, including stoning, particularly for juveniles, and at the treatment of ethnic and religious minorities, especially the adherents of the Baha’i faith and its detained leaders, whose trials had recently begun. Concern was also expressed at the suppression of peaceful demonstrations after the elections and at the impact on freedom of expression, association and assembly, as well as at the reported arbitrary arrest, detention and torture of protesters. 25. The United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland noted Iran’s stated commitment to safeguarding human rights. It expressed concern at the deterioration in the human rights situation since the elections, condemned abuses by security officials and pointed to evidence of civilian deaths and reports of the rape, ill treatment and torture of detainees.    26. Nicaragua highlighted the contributions that Iranian civilization had made to human culture. It noted the achievements of the Iranian Revolution and progress made, as well as the country’s adherence to several human rights treaties. It stated that historical, cultural and religious particularities should be taken into account during the present review, especially the fact that Iran must respect Islamic Shari’a law.  27. Brazil recognized achievements in education, poverty eradication and well-being. It noted Iran’s standing invitation to special procedures and that it could facilitate pending requests for visits. It noted that the country could benefit from cooperation with the International Labour Organization (ILO) on child labour and street children. It cited discrimination against women, adding that their high level of education should be reflected in terms of the labour market and political life. It encouraged Iran to engage in dialogue domestically, permitting free expression. Brazil noted that the Baha’i should enjoy rights extended to others and that imprisoned Baha’i leaders should enjoy due process.  28. Cuba noted Iranians’ work for development, welfare and sovereignty. It stated that the Islamic Revolution had allowed for self-determination and had ended the dictatorship of the Shah, who had received Western armaments and technology, including nuclear technology. It highlighted the strategic plan for integral development, which addressed job creation, education, health, social security, housing and cultural rights. It noted that more than 95 per cent of Iranians had access to primary health care and that the right to education had been implemented. All of this was the case despite the imposition of coercive, unilateral measures.  29. Spain expressed its concern at the continuing deterioration in the human rights situation in Iran. 30. Lebanon noted efforts to promote the socio-economic and political rights of women and to promote and protect the rights of children and disabled persons at the legislative and practical levels. It welcomed the results achieved regarding access to education, despite various obstacles. 31. The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela noted that the Iranian Revolution had restored national sovereignty and also noted the challenges faced by Iran, which was being subjected to unfair economic sanctions and permanent media campaigns of defamation. It noted efforts to promote economic, social and cultural rights. It valued policies to improve health and medical services, with direct assistance planned for vulnerable sectors, providing free medical attention, as well as incentives and benefits for doctors working in rural centres, and university quotas for residents of less-privileged regions.  32. Luxembourg expressed concern at the deterioration in the human rights situation, characterized by increasing restrictions on the freedom of expression and information; an increase in the number of death penalty convictions, including of minors; convictions involving inhuman and degrading treatment, such as whipping and amputation; the harassment and repression of human rights defenders; the intensification of the repression of women’s-rights activists; and the situation of minorities, particularly ethnic and religious minorities. It expressed concern at reports of intimidation, harassment, torture, arbitrary detention, violence, confiscation, limitations on access to education or employment concerning the Baha’i community. 33. Germany, concerned about those who had participated in peaceful post-election protests, asked why Iranians’ efforts to engage in an open dialogue about the future of their country were being hampered. Quoting Iran’s national report, it asked how the country reconciled its views regarding Shari’a law and “Western standards of human rights” with its obligation to respect human rights, enshrined in the Universal Declaration and treaties that it had ratified. 34. Ireland noted with concern human rights violations, including with regard to freedom of expression, association and assembly and the use of torture. It noted reported attacks against and the detention of human rights defenders and deplored attempts to restrict peaceful demonstrations and actions. It noted with concern the high incidence of the death penalty and its use in cases involving minors. Ireland was concerned about serious deficiencies in the area of gender equality and about reports of the systematic torture of prisoners and people in detention. 35. Pakistan noted Iran’s constitutional provisions and laws guaranteeing human rights and the elaborate judicial system, the High Council on Human Rights and the proposed national human rights institution, as well as the high standards set in the area of economic, social and cultural rights, particularly health care, social security, high literacy rates and the rights of disabled persons. It encouraged Iran to take all steps necessary, in accordance with the laws of the land and international obligations, to ensure the protection of its citizens’ rights.  36. The Libyan Arab Jamahiriya highlighted Iran’s legislation on human rights and the principles governing the judiciary, in particular independence, impartiality, the rule of law and public trials. It also noted the creation of the Supreme Council on Human Rights, expanded in 2007, and its position in the governmental hierarchy, as well as the establishment of the council on women and the family. 37. Algeria acknowledged that Iran was an emerging democracy facing challenges in its transition. Noting the establishment of several human rights institutions, it asked about the coordination of their actions. It noted the increased number of human rights non.governmental organizations and their role, and encouraged Iran to continue to promote their participation in human rights forums. It commended Iran for initiatives supporting cultural diversity and for having been a long-standing and generous host to a substantial refugee population. 38. Bahrain commended Iran’s commitment to human rights and noted its intention to cooperate with human rights mechanisms. It noted that, despite the obstacles Iran faced, strategies and programmes to strengthen education were being implemented. It asked about the right of and access to education, especially at the university level. It commended efforts relating to women’s rights. 39. Japan welcomed efforts to expand the rights of women and the ratification of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. It hoped that Iran would soon ratify the Convention against Torture and CEDAW. It noted with concern reports of repression and increasing incidents limiting freedom of expression, as well as the arrest, detention and execution of political activists. 40. In response to the issues raised, the Iranian delegation noted that the State had promoted mechanisms for the adjudication of legal disputes and various methods for proper supervision and implementation. The judicial system was guided by the principles of non.discrimination and due process. 41. According to the law on criminal procedure, in cases of explicit crimes, the police could hold a suspect in custody for a maximum of 24 hours, after which he or she must be brought before a juge d’ instruction. 42. On questions relating to Baha’is, the delegation stressed that, while Baha’i was not recognized as an official religion, its followers enjoyed citizenship rights. Limitations on some Baha’i students were a result of their failure to meet admission requirements.  43. Regarding concerns about the recent illegal demonstrations on the day of Ashura, the delegation stated that arrests had been made for offences against the law, such as the defamation of sanctities and the destruction of public property.  44. With regard to prison conditions, facilities were provided for the humane treatment of and respect for the dignity and rights of prisoners, and for the prohibition of harm and harassment. At an international conference, the Prisons Organization had received an award for the management of criminals and their re-socialization. Human rights training courses had been held for prison staff and managers. Prisoners also had access to high- school education and distance university education. Moreover, Iran had attempted to eliminate solitary prison cells where possible and to expand their size. 45. The delegation added that the sentence of execution was recognized in international human rights documents and the legal systems of many countries. Iran considered execution as permissible only for the most serious crimes and after due process, including review by the Supreme Court. 46. Stressing the values of Iran’s democratic system, the delegation noted that more than 32 elections had been held over the previous three decades, permitting the participation of all political parties, which had various orientations. More than 40 million people had cast their votes in the June 2009 presidential elections. Cast ballots had been meticulously collected and counted, with the participation of legal and official inspectors and some 90,000 independent observers. 47. Legitimate protests would be a post facto symptom of free and democratic elections, but the repercussions of this election were related to foreign powers meddling in Iran’s internal affairs. Iran had addressed the protests through various legal and judicial procedures, the delegation stated. All cases were being duly and openly addressed in competent courts, and defendants had access to their chosen lawyers. High-ranking judicial officials meticulously examined allegations of rights violations. The delegation called for respect for democracy and ensuring the integrity of the vote of the majority in sovereign States. 48. Regarding freedom of assembly, the delegation cited figures showing that on average, more than 5,000 public demonstrations, marches and assemblies were held annually in Iran. Legal assembly required prior permission to ensure the safety of participants. It warned that such activists seeking asylum under human rights pretexts would block the fight against fatal terrorism internationally. 49. Indonesia noted the formulation of legislation aimed at the establishment of a national human rights institution and the upcoming drafting of a strategic national action plan on human rights. Indonesia welcomed policies to promote women’s representation in political and judicial institutions and to broaden the scope of their rights, and acknowledged the human rights training of judges and law enforcement personnel. 50. New Zealand noted that Iran’s post-election response had fallen short of international human rights standards and expressed concern about the scale and nature of violence. It welcomed the closure of the Kahrizak detention facility and the Majlis’ investigation into alleged violations of detainees’ rights. It noted that the use of torture for punitive purposes had not been criminalized and that, despite the moratorium on stoning, it persisted as a Shari’a court-mandated punishment. It was concerned about Baha’i persecution, especially the Yarran trial on the 2008 Shiraz cultural centre bombing. 51. Poland expressed concern at discrimination and limitations regarding the rights of religious minorities and cases of harassment, intimidation and imprisonment. It noted that at least 20 people had been killed in post-election protests and hundreds injured, also citing concerns of the High Commissioner for Human Rights about increasing arrests and the possible illegal use of excessive force. It welcomed the drafting of legislation aimed at establishing a national human rights institution and its forthcoming presentation to the Islamic Consultative Assembly. 52. Qatar noted that the national report reflected developments in the field of human rights, in addition to efforts taken to improve the promotion and protection of human rights and the economic and social conditions of Iran’s citizens. 53. Kazakhstan noted Iran’s history, culture and educated population, which bore the hallmarks of a free society. Recognizing the country’s challenges, it commended the steps taken to establish national institutions to address human rights, capacity-building and new legislation, to review existing laws and to promote civil society engagement. It noted Iran’s ratification of core international human rights treaties. It expressed appreciation for steps taken to promote social, economic and cultural rights, including with regard to education and health. It asked about measures to guarantee the rights of disabled persons. 54. Tajikistan noted constitutional human rights provisions and a national action plan about to be submitted for approval. It mentioned cooperation between the legislature and non-governmental organizations, as well as with some United Nations agencies, such as the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF). It endorsed Iran’s efforts to cooperate with OHCHR. 55. The Czech Republic made recommendations regarding investigations into acts of violence against demonstrators after the 2009 presidential elections, protection against torture, freedom of expression, privacy and non-discrimination, cooperation with special procedures and juvenile justice. 56. Malaysia noted Iran’s commitment to engaging with the international community. It noted that since the 1980s conflict, Iran had benefited from its resolve in key areas, including urban and rural poverty reduction, maternal and child health, social welfare and education. Malaysia understood the challenges facing Iran in guaranteeing economic, social and cultural rights and civil and political rights. It asked about enhancing the representation of minorities, including women, in the legislature and its possible impact in the political arena. 57. Sri Lanka acknowledged Iran’s contributions to the enrichment of human civilization. It recognized the fact that Iranians had chosen the Islamic Republic as their system of government, based on the principles of independence, freedom and progressive Islamic beliefs, while maintaining its democratic character. It noted that the Government had accorded high priority to the establishment of a national human rights institution. 58. India noted improved living standards through economic growth and welfare programmes. Progress on health care and literacy, an active civil society and cooperation with UNICEF and the United Nations Development Programme on child rights and capacity-building were acknowledged. It noted challenges related to reconciling some religious principles with international human rights obligations. India requested Iran to strengthen the empowerment of women, including by acceding to the Convention on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women; developmental efforts for vulnerable groups, including religious minorities; the machinery for civil and political rights; and Iran’s human rights education programme. Iran was also requested to consider establishing a national human rights institution compliant with the Paris Principles.  59. Italy was concerned at the systematic use of capital punishment, especially against juveniles. It noted that, while the Constitution protected freedom of expression, press and political activity, reports of grave violations of those rights had emerged, especially in the aftermath of the presidential elections. Those worrying developments were not consistent with Iran’s candidature for the Human Rights Council. Italy urged Iran to put an immediate end to them and expressed concern at the situation of the Baha’i community.  60. Hungary inquired about a reportedly large number of children without birth certificates and nationality because their fathers were non-Iranian citizens. It cited the deteriorating situation of religious minorities, especially the Baha’i. It also expressed concern about capital punishment, particularly its application to minors, as well as on reports of actions against participants in peaceful demonstrations that seemed to be becoming ever more violent. 61. Chile expressed concern about the situation concerning respect for human rights in Iran, particularly the events following the recent electoral process. It was alarmed at the excessive use of force against demonstrators. It also expressed concern about the application of the death penalty. 62. The Russian Federation noted Iran’s international cooperation on human rights, particularly in the Council. It stated that Iran’s intention to develop a strategic national action plan on human rights and to establish a national human rights institution should be supported. Progress in fighting illiteracy was also acknowledged. 63. Concerning questions regarding the rights of religious minorities, the delegation noted, citing constitutional provisions, that there was no discriminatory approach in the laws and policies of Iran. The recognized religious minorities were fully free to practice their faiths, to conduct their education and to own numerous sacred places and cemeteries. 64. Numerous actions had been taken to increase the participation of religious minorities in various socio-political arenas and decision-making processes, including through the election of representatives in parliament. Religious minorities were present in town and village councils, benefiting from Government financial assistance. They also published media, owned schools, cultural centres and sacred places, and were active in various professions in the economic field, as well as in civil society. Twenty-seven churches were registered on Iran’s national heritage list, and the ancient sacred Tatavoos Church had been nominated for registration on the world heritage list. 65. The delegation also highlighted the significant advancement of Iranian women since the Islamic Revolution, as a result of strategic national polices and programmes for their economic, social and cultural development. It referred to statistics related to improvements in women’s literacy, such as in the fields of higher education, life expectancy, employment and professional life, including the academic, Government, judicial and civil society arenas, as detailed in Iran’s national report. It also cited the codification of the “women human rights and responsibilities charter,” based on the three pillars of spirituality, justice and security and within the framework of religion and national principles. Legislative achievements regarding women’s rights and family issues, including laws to combat human trafficking, forced marriage and slavery, were also highlighted. 66. The delegation noted that children had no criminal responsibility in the judicial system of Iran.  67. The Syrian Arab Republic highlighted Iran’s role in enriching human civilization.  It noted that the 1980 constitution consolidated human rights as a basic principle, as reflected in numerous laws adopted by parliament. It referred to acknowledgements by the Secretary-General and international organizations such as UNICEF of improvements in the living standards of Iran’s population, in particular in terms of life expectancy, child mortality reduction and reproductive health care. It noted that Iran hosted a substantial refugee population. 68. Armenia acknowledged Iran’s contributions to the dialogue among civilizations, noting its policy of supporting and developing cultural diversity. It stressed that political representation and the realization of the economic, social and cultural rights of recognized religious minorities, particularly Armenians, had introduced important standards into the region. It expressed appreciation for measures aimed at the realization of Armenian minority rights, including through the annual allocation of considerable budgetary resources. It praised the protection of Armenian Christian cultural monuments in Iran.  69. Austria noted Iranian laws guaranteeing due process and banning torture. However, it cited reports concerning a high number of illegal arrests, incommunicado detention and torture, rape and murder by security officials, and inquired about the Government’s plans to investigate and prosecute those responsible. Austria expressed concern about the apparently disproportionate application of the death penalty against members of minority groups and political activists. 70. Mexico asked for details about the implementation of the work plan for technical cooperation between the Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran and OHCHR in relation to the judiciary. 71. The Netherlands expressed grave concern about extrajudicial and arbitrary detention, suspects being held without information on charges, the absence of due process and the possible use of torture and other cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment or punishment. It welcomed the fact that the Iranian Government had assumed responsibility for guaranteeing equal rights for men and women.  72. Kyrgyzstan highlighted several initiatives in the judicial area, including 14 investigations related to human rights. It noted activities to promote human rights, such as training courses and the publication of books and periodicals. It welcomed cooperation with international mechanisms, such as the 2003 visit by the Working Group on Arbitrary Detention, and plans to work with OHCHR. 73. Slovakia objected to the use of the death penalty, particularly for juveniles. It noted that, despite the 2008 announcement banning public executions, the practice was still being reported. It noted the arrest and detention of political opponents, human rights defenders, journalists, students, intellectuals, religious representatives and ordinary citizens. Independent press had faced tightened restrictions since the 2009 elections, and the Internet was heavily censored. It noted widespread violence against women and a lack of redress for victims. 74. Belgium recognized Iran’s intention to accede to CEDAW, but remained concerned at existing discriminatory legal provisions and at the arrest, harassment, intimidation, persecution and sentencing of women’s-rights activists. It also noted the prescription of the death penalty for a large number of crimes and its application for the violation of minimum standards. It urged the abolition of the death penalty.  75. Denmark expressed concern about the crackdowns imposed on demonstrators since the presidential election and cited reports of extrajudicial killings, rapes, torture and violations of the right to freedom of assembly and expression, as well as thousands of arbitrary arrests. It welcomed the closing of the Kharizak detention centre, but remained concerned about allegations concerning the torture and ill treatment of prisoners.   76. Estonia asked about Iran’s plans to combat discriminatory practices against women and how it planned to combat violence against them. Regarding reports of arbitrary arrest and the cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment of detainees, it asked whether Iran planned to accede to CAT and its Optional Protocol. 77. Bangladesh acknowledged progress regarding education, health care and poverty reduction. Gender parity in primary schools, the 62 per cent representation by women in higher education, improvements in life expectancy, the reduction of maternal and child mortality, and the adoption of complementary legislation on citizens’ right to facilitate judicial enforcement were noted. Remaining challenges included regional and gender disparity. Bangladesh welcomed the formation of a committee including Islamic scholars to make practical recommendations and encouraged the Government to continue to support its work.  78. The Sudan noted Iran’s efforts in the economic and political spheres and the remaining challenges. It asked about the impact of sanctions on human rights. It recognized the multicultural nature of Iran’s society and requested information about how the country had reflected that nature in its national legislation. It commended Iran’s efforts to enshrine Islamic values in human rights conventions. 79. Romania noted the concern of the Special Rapporteur on freedom of religion at the deteriorating situation for religious minorities, the indication by the Committee on the Rights of the Child that Baha’i were being harassed, intimidated and imprisoned, and the Secretary-General’s observation of increased violence targeting Baha’i, the denial of access to education and the confiscation and destruction of their community property. It noted recent reports of human rights violations against religious minorities and human rights defenders. It asked about measures to prevent persecution and discrimination on religious grounds. 80. China noted the constitutional human rights guarantees and the existence of human rights institutions in all legislative, judicial and administrative departments. The Twenty-Year Vision Strategic Plan for development and other policies and measures had resulted in progress in employment, health, education and social security, it added. China welcomed Iran’s commitment to advocating a human rights dialogue and cooperation, and its efforts to promote cultural diversity. China acknowledged that Iran was a developing country facing difficulties and challenges. It noted the objective of eradicating illiteracy by 2014. 81. Zimbabwe expressed concern at the politicization of Iran’s review. It recognized the country’s achievements in science and technology, culture, politics, economics and international cooperation as testimony to Iran’s commitment to human rights. Zimbabwe noted that Iran continued to face challenges. 82. Viet Nam acknowledged efforts to protect and promote fundamental rights and freedoms and to promote economic development. It commended the adoption of laws and policies and the establishment of mechanisms in those fields. It noted the adoption of the Twenty-Year Vision Strategic Plan for development, which had contributed to job creation, improved health care and services for urban and rural populations. 83. Kuwait welcomed Iran’s initiatives in the area of economic and social rights, in particular to combat illiteracy, and the work done to support disadvantaged segments of the population. 84. The Plurinational State of Bolivia highlighted the Constitution, adopted through referendum in 1980, and its chapter entitled “The rights of the people”. It recognized the fact that the Majlis, elected by direct vote, had a Human Rights Committee and was becoming more inclusive, with women and representatives of religious minorities. Bolivia encouraged Iran to continue to include more women in that body. It highlighted Iran’s commitment to the Civil Code amendment, allowing widows to inherit. It encouraged Iran to continue to work to eradicate discrimination. 85. The head of Iran’s delegation stated that he had been a political dissident under the Shah, a regime that had enjoyed the support of many countries today accusing Iran. He noted that Iran was becoming one of the prominent democratic States in the region. While cooperation and dialogue were appreciated, double standards and political incentives were noted. 86. In response to invitations recently extended, the High Commissioner would visit Iran in 2011, he said. A standing invitation had also been extended to Special Rapporteurs. In terms of technical cooperation, an agenda had been approved. 87. The swift closure, based on existing legal procedures, of the Kahrizak detention centre after the discovery of wrongdoing was emphasized and compared with the situation in other countries. While wrongdoing occurred in Iran as in all States, including with regard to violence against women, the issue should be whether it was a policy of the State. In Islamic States, including Iran, women are very much respected, he noted. 88. The delegation stated that it had taken serious note of the recommendation, hoping that a spirit of cooperation, dialogue and positive-minded engagement would be pursued. 89. The value of culture and history for the enrichment of the human rights experience was highlighted, with the delegation noting that the liberal Western way of life was not the only one to follow. Iran’s experience was rooted in its culture and the belief of millions of Muslims, fully respecting life in Western communities, as reflected by the Constitution, which was modelled on Western ones, yet applied Islamic rationality. II. Conclusions and/or recommendations 90. The recommendations listed below enjoy the support of Iran, out of which recommendations 102 to 123 Iran considers as already implemented or in the process of implementation: 1. Continue to respect international humanitarian law and international law in general (Kuwait); 2. Comply fully with the international human rights obligations to which it is bound (New Zealand); 3. Continue efforts to implement its obligations in the sphere of human rights protection (Russian Federation); 4. Ensure the full implementation of international obligations and constitutional guarantees, including with regard to the prohibition of torture (Austria); 5. Continue its efforts to promote human rights in the economic, social and cultural fields (Sudan); 6. Continue to take innovative measures to ensure that its development policies permit the full enjoyment of economic, social and cultural rights in the country (Plurinational State of Bolivia); 7. Enhance efforts to further promote economic and social rights, as well as the rights of vulnerable groups, including women, children and people with disabilities (Viet Nam); 8. Reconsider the inclusion of “apostasy”, “witchcraft” and “heresy” as capital offences in its updated penal code (New Zealand); 9. Ensure that its legislation and practice conform fully with requirements of article 18 of ICCPR and with its other obligations under international human rights law (Poland); 10. Establish a national human rights institution (NHRI) in full compliance with the Paris Principles (Poland);  11. Explore the possibility of seeking the accreditation of the High Council for Human Rights as Iran’s NHRI through the International Coordinating Committee for NHRIs (Malaysia); 12. Continue to promote the work of the High Council for Human Rights to achieve the establishment of an NHRI, as well as the timely implementation of a national plan for human rights (Plurinational State of Bolivia); 13. Proceed with the implementation of strategies and policies to support human rights infrastructures and to achieve further progress in promoting a culture of respect for human rights (Qatar); 14. Continue its ongoing efforts, in accordance with the Twenty-Year Vision Strategic Plan for Development, to achieve global and sustainable development (Lebanon); 15. Continue to promote its successful social policies aimed at satisfying the needs of its population (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela); 16. Continue its capacity-building programmes related to all aspects of human rights (Zimbabwe); 17. Continue to promote human rights training for public officials and authorities (Plurinational State of Bolivia); 18. Continue to provide and improve human rights education and training for judicial and law enforcement officials (Pakistan); 19. Continue to include human rights in school curriculums (Sudan); 20. Expedite the completion of its strategic national action plan for human rights (Pakistan);  21. Coordinate efforts in a manner that promotes the effective enjoyment of economic, social and cultural rights, and tackle obstacles in that regard (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya); 22. Continue to implement measures aimed at further promoting and protecting children’s rights, and intensify efforts to ensure further opportunities for access to higher education (Qatar); 23. Consider favourably the inclusion of the outcome of the present review in the human rights national strategic plan referred to in paragraph 124 of the national report (Mexico); 24. Continue to consider greater interaction with international human rights mechanisms (Viet Nam); 25. Continue to implement the advice of the important United Nations treaty bodies (Kazakhstan); 26. Cooperate with the United Nations special procedures, and follow up on the requests of visits of special rapporteurs, as announced today (Luxembourg); 27. Respond positively to the pending requests of several special procedures, and to allow the timely carrying out of their visits (Czech Republic); 28. Fully implement the standing invitation extended to the United Nations human rights special procedures (Chile); 29. Allow for a visit by OHCHR and other United Nations Special Rapporteurs and experts who have requested access to Iran (United States); 30. Finalize arrangements for the visit by the delegation from OHCHR (Australia); 31. Redouble its efforts to prevent any form of discrimination (Nicaragua); 32. Develop a legal framework for protecting and promoting the rights of women (Brazil); 33. Adopt measures to guarantee women’s equality under the law (Chile); 34. Ensure the equal treatment of women and girls in law and practice (Austria); 35. Facilitate for all children born to Iranian mothers access to a birth certificate and Iranian nationality, regardless of the nationality of the father (Mexico)1; 36. Continue to improve its policies and programmes to advance the status of women and girls, and protect children, including those with disabilities (Indonesia); 37. Take further concrete steps to promote the rights of disabled persons (Kazakhstan); 38. Continue its efforts to support persons with disabilities and integrate them in society on an equal footing, as real social partners (Kuwait); 39. Respect at least the minimum standards and the provisions of ICCPR and CRC concerning the death penalty, for as long as it is maintained (Belgium); 40. Consider the abolition of juvenile execution (Kazakhstan); 41. Take measures to ensure that no torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment occurs (Netherlands); 42. Take further steps to eliminate torture and other forms of ill treatment, and ensure an effective and impartial judicial system (Denmark);  43. Respect the human rights of prisoners and detainees, and investigate and stop immediately any alleged abuses (Ireland); 44. Ensure that the treatment of detainees duly follows international standards and that irregularities to those standards are properly investigated (Estonia); 45. Conduct a policy of zero tolerance towards the trafficking in women and girl children, child prostitution and the production of pornography involving children (Germany); 46. Ensure, in law and practice, all guarantees of due process of law established in ICCPR, including the principle of presumption of innocence, as well as avoiding any punishment for the exercise of other rights recognized under the Covenant, such as freedom of expression and the right to association and assembly (Mexico); 47. Uphold its constitutional provisions guaranteeing freedom of worship (United States); 48. Respect the freedom of religion (Germany); 49. Take all measures necessary to ensure the protection of religious minorities, including implementing the recommendations on adequate housing put forward by the Special Rapporteur after his visit in 2006 (Denmark); 50. Respect freedom of religion, and assure a fair and transparent trial for members of the Baha’i faith, in full compliance with the commitments undertaken as a State party to the implementation ICCPR and other human rights instruments (Romania);2 51. Continue its policy of promoting and protecting all rights of the members of recognized religious minorities, as an important step to provide cultural diversity in society and create opportunities for those minorities to preserve their identities; and, to that end, further ensure their political representation and promote their greater involvement in the planning and implementation of various projects aimed at providing financial assistance for their educational and cultural needs (Armenia); 52. Take timely and extensive measures to guarantee to its citizens the right to express dissent (Denmark); 53. Enhance freedom of expression and assembly, and to safeguard all groups, journalists and especially human rights defenders (Brazil); 54. Allow freedom of expression, freedom of the media and of assembly (Germany); 55. Fully guarantee the right to freedom of expression, press and political activity, including through the adoption of concrete measures aimed at the implementation of articles 24, 25, 26 and 27 of the Iranian Constitution (Italy); 56. Make a full explanation of the relationship between the restrictive actions taken by the authorities and the Constitution; (Japan); 57. Conduct a review of legislation to ensure that it complies with article 19 of ICCPR, which protects the right to freedom of expression (Slovenia); 58. Guarantee free and unrestricted access to the Internet (Netherlands); 59. Strengthen cooperation with non-governmental organizations, and ensure that the rights of all those involved in human rights advocacy are protected under Iranian law, in accordance with its obligations under ICCPR, and that freedom of association is enshrined in Iranian law (Ireland); 60. Step up efforts to enhance the participation of women in all spheres of socio-economic life, in keeping with the progress made in women’s education (Bangladesh); 61. Continue to promote the living standards of the people by allowing the further enjoyment of economic, social and cultural rights (Kuwait); 62. Continue efforts to guarantee effective social coverage and all related services (Kuwait); 63. Continue to take measures to increase access for its population to health and education services (Cuba); 64. Continue to make progress in education and health care, with a particular focus on women and girl children (Bangladesh); 65. Continue its efforts to provide health, education and social assistance services in rural areas (Kuwait); 66. Continue efforts aimed at the implementation of the Millennium Development Goals and achieve prosperity for the people, in particular by facilitating access for the population to the necessary health services (Qatar); 67. Strengthen mechanisms at the national level to reduce poverty among members of socially vulnerable groups and the problems facing them, and share its experiences with interested developing countries (Kyrgyzstan); 68. Continue to combat poverty, with due regard for regional particularities (Bangladesh); 69. Continue efforts to reduce poverty and limit disparities in education and income (Zimbabwe); 70. Pursue its endeavours to guarantee basic education for all citizens (Lebanon); 71. Continue efforts to develop education, particularly in the rural parts of the country, with the participation of the private and public sectors and non.governmental organizations, with a view to reducing poverty through employment opportunities and the strengthening of human resources (Kyrgyzstan); 72. Continue its efforts to provide educational facilities for students with special educational needs (Sri Lanka); 73. Continue its innovative programmes to eradicate illiteracy, and continue its initiatives to spread education at all levels and throughout the country (China); 74. Continue to implement its literacy plan at the national level to achieve the full elimination of illiteracy (Plurinational State of Bolivia); 75. Sustain its designed programmes aimed at the availability and affordability of higher education (Syrian Arab Republic); 76. Continue to promote and protect its rich historical and cultural heritage (Cuba); 77. Share its experiences in the realization of the cultural rights of the people, including through diversified cultural initiatives and activities (Tajikistan); 78. Strengthen its efforts to include the various Iranian cultures and traditions in its national legislation (Sudan); 79. Continue providing support to the vulnerable group of people who have sought refuge on its territory (Algeria); 80. Continue the extraordinary initiatives of cooperation with developing countries, as a way to achieve the full realization of the right to development (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela); 81. Continue its efforts to promote and protect human rights in accordance with the characteristics, values and needs of Iranian society (Lebanon); 82. Continue to raise awareness about human rights, and to strengthen national efforts to protect them, with due respect for cultural specificities and Islam (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya); 83. Explore the possibility of undertaking a comprehensive study on the positive implications of the implementation of a legal system based on civil and Islamic law, and share its experiences and best practices in that regard (Malaysia); 84. Continue its efforts to strengthen and protect human rights in accordance with the cultural values of the Iranian people (Sri Lanka); 85. Share its experience and best practices with other interested countries, regarding the protection and consolidation of the rights of persons with disabilities (Pakistan); 86. Share its experiences, expertise and initiatives with interested countries in the field of public health and “health tourism” (Pakistan); 87. Continue efforts and contributions at the international level aimed at strengthening international human rights mechanisms; and, in particular, help to make those mechanisms work on the basis of non-politicization and dialogue based on respect and cooperation, which guarantees the realization of the interests of the international community (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya); 88. Continue to promote initiatives in defence of international solidarity and equality dialogue at the relevant United Nations organs, with a view to promoting human rights and solidarity among all nations and peoples of goodwill (Zimbabwe); 89. Continue its international efforts to create an international order based on cooperation and inclusion (Tajikistan); 90. Pursue its efforts at the international level to create an international order based on justice and equality (Syrian Arab Republic); 91. Continue its policies aimed at promoting dialogue among religions and civilizations, at both the national and international levels (Sri Lanka); 92. Continue to promote initiatives on dialogue among cultures (Syrian Arab Republic); 93. Continue, in view of its rich history, culture and tradition, its efforts and initiatives to promote dialogue among religions and civilizations, including by focusing on the theme of promoting and protecting human rights and a culture of peace (Malaysia); 94. Continue its initiative on dialogue among cultures, in particular intercultural dialogue on human rights (China); 95. Share with regional and other interested countries its good practices regarding the protection of the cultural heritage of members of traditional minorities (Armenia); 96. Pursue and enhance its contributions to the dialogue among civilizations (Algeria); 97. Share with interested countries the Iranian experience with regard to promoting the participation of civil society (Algeria);  98. Share with other countries, in particular multicultural countries, its experiences in the strengthening of education (Tajikistan); 99. Continue its efforts to combat drug trafficking (Tajikistan); 100. Share with other developing countries its experiences and best practices in guaranteeing the right to food and combating poverty, in particular in the area of microcredit (Tajikistan); 101. Continue in its plans to realize the enjoyment of economic, social and cultural rights, and tackle the problems related to the illegal and unjustified economic sanctions against the country (Zimbabwe). 102. Guarantee the protection of the civil and political rights of all, particularly dissidents and members of minority groups (Chile); 103. Guarantee, in compliance with its obligations under ICCPR, the effective independence of the procedures and administration of justice, restricted emergency legislation, adequate protection for human rights defenders and political opposition members, and the effective guarantee of  freedom of expression and opinion and freedom of religion and belief (Chile); 104. Investigate and prosecute all those, including Government officials and paramilitary members, suspected of having mistreated, tortured or killed anyone, including demonstrators, political activists, human rights defenders and journalists (Canada); 105. Ensure that competent bodies investigate allegations of torture, enforced disappearance and secret detention, that those responsible are punished and that programmes providing reparation for victims are established (Chile); 106. Establish effective complaint mechanisms for victims of torture (Czech Republic); 107. Take measures to ensure an effective and impartial judicial system, in conformity with ICCPR is guaranteed (Netherlands); 108. Release or charge and bring before a court – in a manner consistent with international fair trial standards and Iran’s own Constitution – all persons detained in connection with the demonstrations following the 2009 presidential elections (Canada); 109. Guarantee access to legal representation for those detained in connection with the demonstrations following the 2009 presidential elections (Poland); 110. With regard to those arrested after the presidential elections, fully respect the right to a fair trial of all persons under arrest and detainees, in compliance with articles 32, 35, 38 and 39 of the Iranian Constitution (Italy); 111. Provide information concerning the whereabouts of detainees, to their families and legal defenders and to provide access to them (Austria); 112. Establish strict accountability of members of the police and military, prison and detention personnel and the judiciary for any violations of human rights, in particular for torture (Czech Republic); 113. Immediately investigate all allegations involving the torture and other ill treatment of those arrested or detained during the demonstrations in June 2009 (Australia); 114. Conduct an independent investigation regarding killings, arrests and detentions following the demonstrations following the 2009 presidential elections, including the possible excessive use of force by security forces (Poland); 115. Conduct a transparent and public inquiry into the violence emanating from security forces following the presidential elections of 2009 (Austria); 116. Take measures to ensure that Government and security officials implicated in human rights abuses relating to extrajudicial and arbitrary detention and the possible use of torture are investigated, prosecuted and punished (Netherlands); 117. Ensure that the trials of seven Baha’is are fair and transparent and conducted in accordance with international standards, and that Iran amend all legislation that discriminates against minority groups (Australia); 118. Ensure that the trial of the Yarran is conducted in a fair and transparent manner, consistent with Iranian law, natural justice and due legal process (New Zealand); 119. Fully respect the rights of the adherents of the Baha’i faith and to judicially prosecute those inciting hatred against them in religious environments, the media and the Internet (Luxembourg); 120. Repeal all criminal provisions dealing with freedom of expression and freedom of assembly to comply with international human rights standards (Slovakia); 121. Take measures to ensure that security forces, including police, armed forces and Basij, do not use excessive force against those exercising their right to freedom of expression, association and assembly (Australia); 122. Amend its press law to define the exceptions to article 24 of its Constitution in specific terms that do not infringe upon the internationally guaranteed rights of free speech and a free press (Canada); 123. Ensure that laws do not criminalize legitimate freedom of expression, association and assembly (Australia). 91. The following recommendations will be examined by the Islamic Republic of Iran, which will provide its responses in due course, but no later than the fourteenth session of the Human Rights Council, to be held in June 2010: 1. Ratify CAT (Italy, Austria, Netherlands)/accede to CAT and the Optional Protocol thereto (Czech Republic)/accede to CAT, as well as the Optional Protocol thereto, and establish a national preventive mechanism provided for by the Protocol (Estonia)/become a party to CAT and accommodate visits by the Special Rapporteur (Denmark)/ratify the Optional Protocol to CAT (Chile)/sign and ratify CAT and the Protocols thereto (Spain)/ratify CAT and the Optional Protocols thereto (Luxembourg); 2. Bring its legislation in line with the international human rights conventions that Iran has ratified, including CRC, and abolish at least the death penalty for crimes committed by persons under the age of 18 (Netherlands); 3. Accept requests for visits from special procedures so that they can take place as soon as possible (Spain)3; 4. Respond positively to pending requests by several United Nations Special Rapporteurs to visit (Austria); 5. Accept a visit to the country by the Special Rapporteurs on violence against women, on the situation of human rights defenders, and on freedom of opinion and expression (Belgium); 6. Take all steps necessary to reform the discriminatory provisions of penal and civil laws, including with regard to women’s equal rights in marriage, access to justice and legal discrimination (Ireland); 7. Bring its national legislation into conformity with international obligations on women’s rights, and to follow the recommendations of the Special Rapporteur on violence against women, its causes and consequences, as well as guarantee the safety of advocates for gender equality (Estonia); 8. Cease execution by stoning (Australia); 9. Take urgent action to reduce the number of offences punishable by death, and to entirely ban the execution of such sentences in case of juveniles (Hungary); 10. Fully comply with its obligations under ICCPR and CRC with regard to the use of inhumane and/or public execution and the use of the death penalty in the case of minors (Ireland); 11. Renounce the execution of persons who were minors at the time of the crime, in accordance with its commitments under CRC (France); 12. Cease all planned executions of juvenile offenders, and to prohibit the imposition of the death penalty for crimes committed by minors (Australia); 13. Eliminate, juvenile executions and executions of persons for crimes that they committed when they were under the age of 18 (Czech Republic); 14. Ban executions of juvenile offenders, in compliance with article 6 of ICCPR (Italy); 15. Strengthen the moratorium on the death penalty against young people, established in October 2008; limit the crimes punishable by the death penalty; to commute death sentences to imprisonment; and withdraw its reservations to CRC and specifically prohibit the application of the death penalty to young people in all circumstances (Spain); 16. Remove or define its blanket reservation to the CRC and to declare an immediate moratorium on juvenile executions, with the aim of abolishing the death penalty for offences committed by minors (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland); 17. Consider eliminating the death penalty for people who were under 18 at the time of the commission of the crime for which they were convicted, as stipulated by CRC, and withdraw its general reservation to the CRC (Chile); 18. End the practice of executing juvenile offenders and of public executions, including through stoning (Austria); 19. Extend the rights guaranteed in Iranian legislation to all religious groups, including the Baha’i community (Brazil); 20. Review security and criminal laws that are open to abuse in the form of the persecution of human rights defenders and political critics (Czech Republic). 92. The recommendations below did not enjoy the support of the Islamic Republic of Iran, of which 28 (recommendations Nos. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 11, 12, 13, 15, 22, 23, 24, 27, 28, 29, 31, 32, 36, 37, 38, 39, 41, 42, 43 and 44) Iran considers to be inconsistent with the Institution-Building text and/or not internationally recognized human rights, or not in conformity with its existing laws, pledges and commitments: 1. Sign and ratify CEDAW (Spain)/ratify CEDAW and the Optional Protocols thereto (Luxembourg)/accede to CEDAW (Estonia)/ratify CEDAW as soon as possible, without any reservation (Belgium)/take further steps to ratify CEDAW (Netherlands); ratify CEDAW (Chile); 2. Cease all actions as a third-State proxy, and to refrain from financing, organizing, training, supplying and equipping non-State actors committing acts in violation of international law (Israel); 3. Amend its Islamic Penal Code law on “Offences against the National and International Security of the Country” to define “national security” and associated breaches in specific terms that do not infringe upon the internationally guaranteed rights of free speech and assembly (Canada); 4. Ensure that the new Penal Code safeguards the rights guaranteed by ICCPR, to which Iran is a signatory, in particular by defining or removing offences open to political manipulation, such as so-called “offences against national and international security”, currently used to curtail freedom of expression, assembly and association (United Kingdom); 5. Allow the Special Rapporteur on torture to visit the country, and provide him with access to detention facilities (United States of America); 6. Invite the Special Rapporteur on torture to visit the country (Australia); 7. Agree to a visit by the Special Rapporteur on torture to investigate these practices and allegations of systematic violence in detention facilities (New Zealand); 8. Cooperate with the Special Rapporteurs, such as the Special Rapporteur on torture, who have been refused access to Iran since 2005, despite the standing invitation extended to them (France); 9. Grant access to the United Nations Rapporteurs on torture and on the independence of judges and lawyers, and facilitate their visits (Netherlands); 10. Facilitate visits by all special procedures mandate holders outstanding since 2005, and extend an invitation to the Secretary-General so that he may investigate the post-election violence and independently assess the human rights situation (United Kingdom); 11. Accept a visit by the working group on arbitrary detention to investigate the detention conditions of prisoners (France); 12. Repeal or amend all discriminatory provisions against women and girls in national legislation (Israel); 13. Take all appropriate measures to end discrimination and harassment against persons belonging to ethnic and religious minorities (Austria); 14. Ensure that all minorities, and particularly the Baha’i community, can exercise all of their rights free from discrimination and persecution, in conformity with the recommendations of the Human Rights Committee, the Committee on the Rights of the Child and the Special Rapporteur on adequate housing (Mexico); 15. Put an end to discrimination and incitement to hatred vis-à-vis the adherents of the Baha’i faith (Luxembourg); 16. End incitement to hatred, including statements that show contempt for General Assembly resolutions 60/7 and 61/255, on Holocaust remembrance and Holocaust denial, respectively (Israel); 17. Eliminate, in law and practice, all forms of discrimination against persons belonging to religious, ethnic, linguistic and other minorities, as well as against lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender persons (Israel); 18. Revise legislative provisions that are discriminatory on the basis of sex, religion, political opinion or sexual orientation (Luxembourg); 19. Decriminalize consensual same-sex activity between adults and eliminate legal provisions discriminatory to women and religious, national and other minorities (Czech Republic);  20. Abolish the death penalty (Luxembourg)/immediately stop executions and abolish the death penalty (Germany)/amend the relevant legislation to abolish capital punishment entirely, in keeping with General Assembly resolutions 62/149 and 63/168, as well as the Second Optional Protocol to ICCPR, and transfer the existing death sentences to imprisonment terms (Slovakia)/consider a moratorium on the death penalty with a view to abolishing it (Brazil)/ introduce a moratorium on the death penalty with a view to its abolition (Italy)/extend the moratorium on the death penalty and abolish the death penalty, especially for juveniles, in keeping with its international commitments (Estonia)/introduce a moratorium on executions as soon as possible (Belgium)/put an end to executions and adopt a moratorium on the death penalty (France)/commute all death sentences, in particular executions of political prisoners, and abolish, in practice, public executions by hanging and stoning (Israel); 21. Immediately halt the execution of juveniles and political prisoners and, furthermore, establish an official moratorium (Canada)/comply with its obligations under article 37 of CRC and article 6 of ICCPR and prohibit executions of persons who, at the time of their offences, were under the age of 18 (Israel)/cease immediately the use of the death penalty, especially for minors and those who committed offences while they were juveniles (New Zealand)/favourably consider alternative sentences for juvenile offenders, and immediately halt executions of all juvenile offenders on death row (Slovenia); 22. Consider the elimination of cruel punishment, including juvenile execution and stoning (Japan); 23. Take immediate action to cease the practice of torture in detention facilities, and investigate and prosecute allegations of torture (United States of America); 24. Eradicate, in national legislation and in practice, torture or other cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment (Israel); 25. Codify torture as an offence in law, in keeping with the definition set out in CAT (New Zealand); 26. Ensure that all acts of torture are crimes according to national legislation, and that the definition used complies with that set out in article 1 of CAT (Czech Republic); 27. Adopt and implement efficient policies aimed at eliminating gender-based violence, combating traditional stereotypes through targeted human rights educational campaigns, and guaranteeing for victims access to justice and rehabilitation (Slovakia); 28. Release all political prisoners (Luxembourg); 29. Ensure the immediate release of illegally detained persons (Austria); 30. Guarantee the independence of the judicial system, renounce the staging of collective trials and allow the effective exercise of the right to a defence (France); 31. Provide due process of law for those charged with crimes, and to discontinue the “show” trials (United States); 32. Provide guarantees of a fair trial, allowing access to independent observers during the judicial proceedings; amend the provisions of the procedural criminal code that allows the Government to deny the basic right to a lawyer during the accusation period; guarantee transparency and accountability and allow lawyers access to relevant information concerning each case; investigate and prosecute all public officials and Basij paramilitary members suspected of torture, ill treatment or extrajudicial execution; eliminate every restriction on the freedom of expression, particularly with regard to digital media, which runs counter to ICCPR (Spain); 33. Put an end to abusive recourse to trials in camera, and authorize international observers to attend trials (France); 34. Take steps to end the current culture of impunity by ensuring that all allegations of abuse are investigated by the judiciary in a timely, independent and transparent manner (United Kingdom); 35. Accept the establishment of an international, credible and independent inquiry mechanism to shed light on the violations since the 2009 presidential elections (France); 36. Ensure the transparent and independent investigation of the numerous cases of excessive violence against demonstrators, followed by mistreatment and torture in detention in the aftermath of the presidential elections in June 2009, and ensure the prosecution of the persons responsible (Czech Republic); 37. Carry out independent investigations into serious abuses against participants in peaceful demonstrations, and hold the perpetrators accountable for their crimes (Hungary); 38. End its policy of fanatic Islamism and intolerance towards persons belonging to other religions, including adherents of the Baha’i faith (Germany); 39. Provide for urgent instructions to all schools to respect freedom of religion or belief and to take specific measures to reprimand any teacher or school administrator who intimidates or discriminates against Baha’i children (Slovenia); 40. Release detained Baha’i leaders and end policies of discrimination against Baha’i and other religious and ethnic minorities (Canada); 41. End acts of repression against persons belonging to ethnic or religious minorities, particularly the Baha’i, and to respect their rights (France); 42. End its severe restrictions on the rights to free expression, association and assembly; and end the harassment and persecution of journalists and bloggers (United States); 43. Stop the intimidation and harassment of human rights defenders, journalists, bloggers, media and artists (Austria); 44. Put an end to the detention and trials of writers solely for the practice of their right to freedom of expression (Slovenia); 45. Prosecute security officials involved in torturing, raping or killing (Austria). 93. All conclusions and/or recommendations set out in the present report reflect the positions of the submitting State(s) and/or the State under review. They should not be construed as endorsed by the Working Group as a whole. Annex Composition of the delegation The delegation of Iran was headed by H.E. Dr. Mohammad Javad Larijani, Secretary General of the High Council for Human Rights, Judiciary, and composed of 32 members: • H.E.	 Mr. Hamid Baejdi Nejad, Ambassador, Chargé d’Affaires a.i., Permanent Mission of I.R. Iran, Geneva; • H.E. Ms. Fatemeh Alia, Member of the Parliament; • H.E. Mr. Yonathan Betkolia, Member of the Parliament; • H.E. Mr. Seyed Ali Raeisolsadati, Deputy Minister of Justice; • H.E.	 Mr. Mohammad Azimi Targhadri, Deputy Minister of Culture and Islamic Guidance; • H.E.	 Dr. Seyed Mohammad Reza Mavalizadeh, Deputy Minister of Labour and Social Affairs; • H.E. Mr. Arsalan Bagheri, Deputy Minister of Sciences, Research and Technology; • H.E. Mr. Seyed Hossein Rezvani, Deputy Director General for International Legal Affairs, Ministry of Foreign Affairs; • Mr. Siyamak Favaedi, Assistant Prosecutor of the Supreme Court; • Mr. Hossein Lotfi, Deputy for Judicial Affairs, Justice Department of Tehran Province; • Mr. Khosro Hakimi, Advisor to the Head of the Judiciary; • Mr. Mohammad Ali Ebrahimkhani, Head, Courts of Appeal, Tehran Province; • Mr. Mehdi Dehno Khalaji, Senior Expert, High Council of Human Rights; • Dr. Mohammad Javad Shariatbagheri, Advisor to the S. G. of the High Council for Human Rights; • Mr. Seyed Mohammad Mirzamani, Deputy S. G. of the High Council for Human Rights; • Ms. Masoumeh Beigom 	Taheri, Director General for Women and Family, Presidential Office; • Mr. Abbaszadeh Meshkini, Director General, Ministry of Interior; • Mr. Hossein Nouri, Head, Dept. for International Relations, Ministry of Labour; • Dr. Mahboubeh Mobasher, Chancellor, Al-Zahra University; • Mr. Reza Taghizadeh Dehkordi, Expert, Ministry of Foreign Affairs; • Mr. Hamed Esmaeil Pour, Expert, Ministry of Foreign Affairs; • Mr. Ali Bahreini, Deputy Director, Human Rights Department, Ministry of Foreign Affairs; • Mr. Mohsen Esmaeilifar, Expert, Human Rights Department, Ministry of Foreign Affairs; • Mr. Mohsen Ghanei, Expert, Human Rights Department, Ministry of Foreign Affairs; • Mr. Mohammad Mehdi Soleimani, Expert, High Council for Human Rights; • Mr. Mehdi Oladi Ghadikalaei, Expert, High Council for Human Rights; • Mr. Mohammad Ali Salami, Expert, High Council for Human Rights; • Mr. Farhad Oghbayi, Expert, High Council for Human Rights; • Mr. Alireza Eghbali, Expert, High Council for Human Rights; • Mr. Asadollah Eshragh Jahromi,	 Counsellor, Permanent Mission of I.R. Iran, Geneva; • Mr. Asgar Sadrkhah, Counsellor, Permanent Mission of I.R. Iran, Geneva; • Mr. Mohammad Ghaebi, First Secretary, Permanent Mission of I.R. Iran, Geneva. Support Team: • Mr. Akbari, Interpreter • Mr. Mohammad Savoji, Interpreter • Mr. Hamid Pirmoradi • Mr. Ayoub Eslami • Mr. Morteza Bagheri • Mr. Davoud Nabavi 