United Nations 	A/HRC/14/14 Distr.: General 15 March 2010 Original: English General Assembly Human Rights Council Fourteenth session Agenda item 6 Universal Periodic Review Report of the Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review* Iraq * 	Previously issued under document symbol A/HRC/WG.6/7/L.13; minor revisions have been added under the authority of the secretariat of the Human Rights Council on the basis of editorial changes made by States through the ad referendum procedure.  The annex to the present report is circulated as received. Contents Paragraphs Page Introduction............................................................................................................. 1–4 3 I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process................................................ 5–80 3 A. Presentation by the State under review........................................................... 5–15 3 B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review........................ 16–80 5 II. Conclusions and/or recommendations..................................................................... 81–84 12 III. Voluntary pledges and commitments ...................................................................... 85–93 22 Annex Composition of the delegation ......................................................................................................... 24 Introduction 1. The Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review, established in accordance with Human Rights Council resolution 5/1, held its seventh session from 8 to 19 February 2010.  The review of Iraq was held at the 13th meeting, on 16 February 2010. The delegation of Iraq was headed by the Minister for Human Rights, H.E. Mrs. Wijdan M. Salim. At its 17th meeting, held on 19 February 2010, the Working Group adopted the report on Iraq. 2. On 7 September 2009, the Human Rights Council selected the following group of rapporteurs (troika) to facilitate the review of Iraq: Bosnia and Herzegovina, India and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland. 3. In accordance with paragraph 15 of the annex to resolution 5/1, the following documents were issued for the review of Iraq: (a) A national report submitted/written presentation made in accordance with paragraph 15 (a) (A/HRC/WG.6/7/IRQ/1); (b) A compilation prepared by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) in accordance with paragraph 15 (b) (A/HRC/WG.6/7/IRQ/2); (c) A summary prepared by OHCHR in accordance with paragraph 15 (c) (A/HRC/WG.6/7/IRQ/3).  4. A list of questions prepared in advance by Argentina, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Germany, Latvia, the Netherlands, Sweden, Switzerland and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland was transmitted to Iraq through the troika. Those questions are available on the extranet of the universal periodic review. I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process A. Presentation by the State under review 5. The delegation emphasized the importance of the universal periodic review. It noted that Iraq had experienced difficult circumstances and that the Iraqi people had faced gross violations owing to the policies of successive Governments, wars, economic sanctions for more than 10 years and fierce terrorist attacks that had claimed the lives of thousands of individuals and affected infrastructure. 6. Since the regime change in the spring of 2003 and the beginning of the establishment of a democratic Government, institutions had been established to address human rights issues, such as the Ministry of Human Rights, which had sought to achieve ambitious goals and to overcome the legacy of human rights violations. On the normative front, Iraq had proceeded to review national legislation, assess its compliance with human rights principles and accede to core international human rights instruments. 7. The Ministry of Human Rights has attached special importance to spreading a culture of human rights through the establishment of institutions, the provision of support to civil society, the inclusion of human rights concepts in educational curriculums and human rights courses in universities, and the adoption of a medium-term plan to disseminate a culture of human rights.   8. The Government of National Unity formed after the 2005 democratic elections has placed the task of protecting human rights at the core of its programme. Terrorist groups have sought to undermine the rule of law by instilling chaos, creating a feeling of insecurity, destroying infrastructure and targeting scientists. One such group recently threatened to disrupt the forthcoming electoral process. 9. The national report is the outcome of the work of a committee composed of a number of ministries that coordinated with other governmental, parliamentarian, judicial and non-governmental institutions. The committee was open to consultations and networking with civil society organizations and received technical assistance from the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) and the United Nations Office for Project Services (UNOPS). Since the submission of the report, a number of developments have taken place, including the adoption of a new electoral law with new guarantees for the representation of minorities and the adoption of the open list. Moreover, law on civil society organizations was adopted that regulates the work of such organizations and supports their role in society. An independent high commission for human rights is in the process of being put in place. 10. Responding to advance questions, the delegation noted that the Government understood the need to review a large number of laws with a view to harmonizing them with international human rights standards. Iraq has finalized the procedures for acceding to two conventions and has begun to study the possibility of becoming party to additional instruments. The Government has drafted new laws on combating the trafficking in persons; fighting against terrorism, money-laundering and the financing of terrorism; freedom of opinion, assembly and peaceful demonstration; and the protection of journalists. 11. The delegation stressed that, because of the exceptional circumstances in Iraq and the prevalence of terrorist crimes targeting the right to life, the death penalty had been maintained as a means of deterrence and to provide justice to the families of victims. The number of cases in which the death sentence is pronounced has been reduced, and its application is limited to the most serious crimes, including genocide, crimes against humanity and crimes of terrorism. All legal guarantees are provided to the accused in all stages of prosecution and until the sentence is carried out, and efforts are being made to reduce the number of executions to a minimum. 12. Torture and ill treatment are criminalized and prohibited in the Constitution and law, and officials accused of such acts are referred to the courts. The Ministry of Human Rights monitors allegations of torture in places of detention. Cases of torture do not represent a systematic policy, but rather occur because of lack of experience on the part of investigators, and constitute individual cases. The judiciary has attached importance to the protection and implementation of legal guarantees at all stages, and confessions obtained under torture are not taken into account. Iraq has finalized the national process of acceding to the Convention against Torture (CAT). 13. There are public annual reports on conditions in prisons and detention centres, which contain detailed information about the measures taken by the judiciary and executive powers. There is also an annual report containing information about the victims of terrorism and violence and about policies to combat terrorism and reduce violence in the country. 14. Terrorist groups have targeted minority groups, including through attacks on places of worship, killings and kidnappings. Efforts to protect minorities include protecting and reconstructing places of worship; ensuring the return of, protection for and financial assistance to displaced minorities; compensating victims; and coordinating directly with the heads of various sects in order to fulfil their needs. 15. In January, the Government launched a national strategy for the alleviation of poverty, in cooperation with the World Bank. The objectives of the strategy were incorporated into the five-year development plan and are aimed at reducing poverty by 30 per cent by ensuring better incomes for the poor and improving their situation in terms of health care, education, housing and social protection, and by reducing the disparities between man and women. B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review 16. During the interactive dialogue, 57 delegations made statements. A number of delegations thanked the Government for its comprehensive national report, prepared through a large-scale process of consultation; for its comprehensive presentation; and for its responses to advance questions, which had allowed for an assessment of Iraq’s human rights promotion and protection efforts. Recommendations made during the interactive dialogue are found in chapter II of the present report. 17. Saudi Arabia noted the efforts to promote and implement human rights. Despite the challenges, the Government, through established legal mechanisms, was seeking to protect human rights, to enhance the role of civil society in rebuilding the country, to improve security and to provide basic living conditions for all. It made recommendations.  18. Jordan noted that, despite the difficulties it faced, Iraq had made genuine efforts to protect human rights. It hoped that the upcoming elections would be successful and contribute to reconciliation. It encouraged Iraq to strengthen laws on human rights. Jordan made recommendations.  19. Italy appreciated Iraqi’s commitment to protecting all religious communities. Ensuring their effective safety, freedom of worship and equal opportunities would enable them to better contribute to stability and to social and economic progress. It noted with concern that Iraq had resumed capital executions in May 2009. Italy made recommendations.  20. Algeria inquired about issues raised recently in the media, particularly the role of the justice and accountability commission and the upcoming elections. It asked about human rights education in schools and universities, as well as about prison conditions and human rights violations committed by foreign private security companies. Algeria made recommendations.  21. Brazil recognized the Government’s achievements, accomplished despite existing challenges. It highlighted the constitutional provisions on human rights, the establishment of a national institution and the participation of women in the Council of Representatives. It noted that full enjoyment of human rights was incompatible with war and that the situation of Iraq spoke for itself. Lack of infrastructure had impaired the enjoyment of rights. Brazil made recommendations.  22. The United Arab Emirates expressed appreciation for the spreading of a culture of human rights. It highlighted the establishment of the Ministry of Human Rights, the national human rights institute and, as an independent institution, the High Council for Human Rights. It commended Iraq’s efforts to cooperate with human rights mechanisms and UNAMI. It made a recommendation. 23. Kuwait noted the efforts to enhance human rights and eliminate the vestiges of human rights violations suffered in the past. It commended the initiatives to spread a culture of human rights and the inclusion of human rights standards in the judicial system. Kuwait made recommendations.  24. The Sudan welcomed the international covenant adopted by Iraq with a view to establishing a democratic Government. It commended the Government’s interest concerning the role of women and the family, as well as the increase in school enrolment and the decrease in child mortality. The Sudan made recommendations.  25. The United States of America hoped that the new Government would empower the Human Rights Commission. It commended efforts to address poor prison conditions and investigate allegations of detainee abuse. It expressed concern about the protection of minorities, women and LGBT. Continued attacks on religious sites and other sectarian violence were hampering the ability to practice religion freely. It made recommendations. 26. Norway expressed appreciation for the establishment of the Ministry of Human Rights, the active participation of civil society and the establishment of quotas for the eligibility of women in elections. However, Norway remained concerned about the working conditions and the vulnerable situation of human rights defenders and journalists, and the practice of capital punishment, in addition to the issue of mitigating excuse regarding “honour crimes”. Norway made recommendations. 27. Belgium noted the positive steps taken by the Government, in particular regarding elections and the establishment of a Commission on Human Rights. It regretted the reinstatement of the death penalty and inquired about the notorious gap between official and civil society figures concerning the number of executions. It expressed concern about the situation of minorities. Belgium made recommendations. 28. Mexico recognized efforts to set up an institutional human rights framework. It recalled that human rights protection was an obligation of the State and that, under the current circumstances, respect for international standards was particularly important. It inquired about the Government’s intention regarding the requests for visits made by some special procedures. Mexico made recommendations.  29. Australia commended recent achievements in the face of reduced violence and Iraq’s commitment to democratic elections. It remained concerned about the persecution of religious minorities and other vulnerable groups, including homosexuals; continued violence against women; the treatment of detainees; and the application of the death penalty. It welcomed assurances concerning the human rights situation at Camp Ashraf. Australia made recommendations. 30. New Zealand welcomed the reduction in maternal mortality. It asked for an update on the process of ratifying the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. It was concerned that the Supreme National Commission for Accountability had disbarred candidates for the 2010 elections without justification. It was troubled by “honour” killings and regretted that, legally, a motive of “honour” could be a mitigating factor. It noted with concern the execution of prisoners. Some visits by special procedures remain outstanding. It made recommendations.  31. Tunisia noted the constitutional principles aimed at ensuring equality, non.discrimination, the independence of the judiciary and the enjoyment of civil and political rights. It referred to the care taken in establishing strategies for promoting women’s rights and the rights of the disabled, despite difficult circumstances in Iraq. It noted the pioneering experience in establishing a culture of human rights among children in schools. Tunisia made a recommendation. 32. Canada recognized Iraq’s continuing efforts to address human rights violations and strengthen respect for the rule of law, but expressed concern that women had not been afforded adequate protection against violence and at the escalation in attacks targeting homosexuals. It also noted reports concerning serious violations of the rights of detainees and the resumption of the use of capital punishment. Canada made recommendations.  33. Germany noted reports that “honour crimes” against women continued to be frequent and that laws against domestic violence were still lacking. It asked how the Government was improving the situation of women and girls with regard to violence. Germany stated that attacks on journalists and religious pressure were placing limitations on freedom of opinion and expression. It asked about measures to ensure the stability necessary for functioning media. It made recommendations. 34. Hungary inquired about measures taken to eliminate child labour and to guarantee the full enjoyment of freedom of religion, in particular the fact that the Constitution established that freedom of religion could be restricted if in conflict with Islamic law.  It also requested information about measures to improve the level of education and to guarantee equal access to proper education. Hungary made a recommendation.  35. Denmark welcomed Iraq’s reforms. It was troubled by the short time between sentencing and executions, with limited access to judicial recourse. It was concerned that the number of Iraqis belonging to minorities appeared to be decreasing and that such groups remained exposed to violent attacks. The members of some groups had been deemed “heretics” by the clergy, thus legitimizing the killing of such individuals. Such practices should be actively countered. Denmark made recommendations.  36. Bahrain noted that, despite the difficulties resulting from the wars, the sanctions and the lack of security over the previous three decades, Iraq attached importance to promoting human rights as set out in its laws. It noted the improvement in the enjoyment by women of their rights and in their participation in public life. It commended the establishment of human rights units in ministries and the spreading of a culture of human rights. 37. The Republic of Korea highlighted the fact that peace, security, development and human rights were mutually reinforcing. It welcomed the legal framework for human rights put in place, but remained concerned about continuing reports of human rights violations, including arrest, detention, torture and ill treatment. It also stated that corruption could undermine trust in the rule of law. It made recommendations.  38. France expressed understanding with regard to the challenges faced by Iraq. It noted that the number of executions had significantly increased in recent years. France noted that many people had been killed on the basis of their sexual orientation and that the Iraqi Penal Code still criminalised homosexuality. France made recommendations. 39. Turkey welcomed the International Covenant for Iraq, aimed at providing stronger legal and institutional protection, particularly for vulnerable groups such as minorities, internally displaced persons, women and children. Turkey believed that democratic elections would provide an opportunity to establish a representative parliament and noted that attempts to exclude certain groups from the elections had the potential to create instability. It asked for further information about the ratification of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities.  40. Pakistan noted the Government’s efforts to strengthen the institutional and legal framework to protect human rights. It also highlighted the fact that Iraq was party to most core international human rights instruments. It requested further details about the International Covenant with Iraq that commits domestication of international human rights, as well as the capacity-building of concerned officials and agencies.  Pakistan made recommendations.  41. Malaysia fully appreciated the security situation, the challenges in implementing the rule of law and resource constraints. It was encouraged by the Government’s determination to improve the human rights situation and welcomed the close cooperation with human rights bodies. Malaysia was encouraged by efforts to establish a comprehensive plan for security and economic, political and social welfare. Malaysia made recommendations. 42. The United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland welcomed the improvements in women’s rights, detention conditions and minority rights, and was encouraged by the development of a five-year plan for protecting human rights. It was pleased with the establishment of an independent human rights commission. It remained concerned about the fact that people still waited years in detention before trial, often in overcrowded prisons, and about allegations of torture. It was also concerned that Iraq maintained the death penalty and that the number of executions had increased in the last 2 years. It made recommendations.  43. Lebanon recognized Iraq’s efforts to achieve national unity, provide security for its citizens and build the human rights infrastructure, despite the enormous challenges faced by the country. It noted the programmes aimed at repatriation for Iraqis abroad and internally displaced persons, as well as programmes to ensure that all Iraqis enjoyed social and economic rights, by fighting poverty and extending social security. Lebanon made recommendations.  44. Slovenia noted that the Optional Protocols to ICCPR, CEDAW and CAT and the Refugees Convention had yet to be ratified. It highlighted the establishment of human rights offices in ministries. It noted that the Constitution still contained discriminatory wording towards women, and that armed groups persecuted minorities with impunity. Non-Muslims remained under serious threat, being subject to forced conversion, kidnapping and torture. It asked what measures were envisaged to tackle that situation. It noted that numerous death sentences were being carried out. Slovenia made recommendations. 45. Egypt noted the interest in promoting respect for human rights, despite serious difficulties. The activities of terrorist groups and instability had caused and were still causing suffering. Egypt paid tribute to the human rights committees established within ministries, the spreading of a culture of human rights and training, and the establishment of the Commission for Human Rights. 46. The delegation stated that there had been many developments concerning the civil and political rights of women, including with regard to the number of women in Parliament and in decision-making positions and women’s participation in civil society. The Government was implementing a programme to combat domestic violence, and an agreement had been reached with the United Nations to organize a number of seminars to empower women and improve the enjoyment of their human rights. The Ministry of Human Rights held weekly seminars, most of which addressed the problems faced by women. There was an awareness-raising campaign on CEDAW. The report to the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women was nearly complete. 47. The Ministry was working towards the abolition of article 128 of the Penal Code, on mitigating factors for “honour crimes”. With regard to combating the trafficking in persons, a multisectoral committee that assessed the situation of victims had been established, and a bill aimed at addressing that problem was being considered by the Council of Ministers. A number of training courses had been conducted to raise the awareness of children and young people about trafficking. The Iraqi law and the proposed law imposed heavy penalties for the perpetrators of such crimes. 48. Laws in the Kurdistan region did not discriminate between men and women, and that policies ensure equality, and abolish any discriminatory provisions, in particular regarding polygamy. Laws had been amended to combat violence against women, including the abolishment of the article on mitigating factors in “honour crimes”. The government of Kurdistan had adopted policies to combat violence against women, and institutional mechanisms had been established to that end. Anyone who had incited women to commit suicide was prosecuted by the courts. The crime of female genital mutilation was dealt with under the Penal Code until the law on domestic violence had been issued.   49. Judicial and other authorities had been empowered to address the issue of torture, and visits to detention centres had been carried out by judicial, governmental and non.governmental institutions and ICRC. The Government, in cooperation with UNOPS, had supported three rehabilitation centres for victims of torture, and the law enabled victims to seek financial compensation. With support from the United Nations and the European Union, the justice network for prisoners had been created and was the first independent network of civil society organizations aimed at strengthening the independent monitoring of the human rights situation. 50. Austria welcomed the ratification of the two Optional Protocols to CRC and recalled the overdue reports under CRC and CEDAW. Children and women had been particularly affected by the general situation and, particularly, by “honour crimes”. It expressed concern at the indications that courts were failing to meet minimum fair-trial standards. Austria made recommendations. 51. The Netherlands commended Iraq’s ratifications of ICCPR, ICERD and CEDAW. It expressed serious concern about judgements imposing the death penalty, including for ordinary crimes. It noted reports about instances of due process not being observed, the possible use of torture and the existence of unofficial detention centres. It noted that “honour killings” still occurred. It noted indications by UNAMI that a number of homosexuals had been assassinated. The Netherlands made recommendations. 52. Kazakhstan encouraged Iraq to continue to strengthen peace and promote democracy and national unity. Kazakhstan welcomed the establishment of a Ministry of Human Rights, cited the high level of women’s participation and representation in elected positions and was pleased to note Iraq’s steps to promote social, economic and cultural rights. Kazakhstan made recommendations.  53. Japan hoped that the High Commission for Human Rights would begin to take effective action. It expected additional mechanisms for the return of internally displaced persons and refugees. It stated that budget constraints and a lack of personnel had prevented the Ministry of Women’s Affairs from functioning. It welcomed efforts to improve the situation of detention centres. Japan made recommendations.  54. Poland expressed concern with regard to the rights of religious minorities. UNAMI had received reports that Christians were being threatened, attacked and, in some cases, murdered by armed groups. The Special Rapporteur on freedom of religion or belief noted that indicating one’s religious affiliation on official documents entailed a serious risk of abuse or discrimination. Poland asked about steps aimed at combating intolerance and acts of violence motivated by intolerance. It made recommendations. 55. The Libyan Arab Jamahiriya noted that Iraq was party to most human rights and ILO conventions. It noted that during the past century, the school system had been among the best. It made recommendations. 56. Switzerland acknowledged the security constraints faced and the difficulties encountered in normalizing the security institutions and the judicial system. It highlighted improvements, in particular in the area of federalism. It noted the increase in the use of the death penalty and in the number of executions. There is a need to carry out investigations and punish those responsible for attacks against minorities, women, human rights defenders and journalists. Switzerland made recommendations. 57. Bosnia and Herzegovina inquired about civil society’s role in the preparation of the national report. It expressed concern at the fact that judges and lawyers were being threatened for having practised their profession. It noted that journalists, labour leaders and human rights defenders were exposed to serious threats, and asked about steps to prevent such violations. It noted that challenges had to be fought under extreme insecurity. Bosnia and Herzegovina made recommendations.  58. Armenia felt encouraged by the Government’s achievements and recognized that securing the right to life was a precondition for further progress.  It supported the efforts to protect vulnerable groups from the violence, in particular confessional groups of Christians, Yazidis, Sabean Mandaeans and Shabaks. It recalled the generosity of the Iraqi people, who had accommodated victims of conflicts during the past century. Armenia made a recommendation. 59. Nigeria acknowledged the efforts to guarantee economic, social and cultural rights. Nigeria welcomed the improvements in school enrolment levels, the narrowing of the gender gap, the reduction in the infant and maternal mortality rates and in the area of women’s rights. Nigeria noted that Iraq faced enormous challenges in achieving the full promotion and protection of all human rights. Nigeria made a recommendation. 60. China noted had Iraq had acceded to many international instruments and that the inclusion of human rights standards in the Constitution was a precondition for restoring the rule of law. It highlighted the establishment of the Ministry of Human Rights and praised the increased school enrolment and reduced gender disparities. It noted the collapse of the security system and the activities of terrorist groups. It hoped that Government would maintain social order so as to guarantee the right to life and development. China noted that the international community should continue to provide assistance.  61. Uruguay highlighted the ratification of the two Optional Protocols to the Convention on the Rights of the Child and hoped that the initial relevant reports would be submitted on time. It welcomed the establishment of the Ministry of Women’s Affairs, but regretted the fact that violence against women persisted. Uruguay made recommendations.  62. Morocco expressed satisfaction at Iraq’s commitment to achieving stability, prosperity and the promotion of human rights within the context of its territorial integrity. The normative framework was noted, and human rights education was cited as an achievement in the national report. Morocco inquired about the mechanisms for providing compensation to victims of human rights violations. Morocco made recommendations.  63. Slovakia acknowledged the independence of the judiciary enshrined in the Constitution, while noting that courts still did not meet fair-trial standards. Accountability was a source of concern due to interference, a lack of institutional capacity and fears of retaliation. Judicial staff were subject to threats, and witnesses were not provided the necessary protection. Slovakia expressed concern at the reinstatement of the death penalty and noted that the range of punishable offences was quite broad. It condemned the continued use of minors by non-State militants. Slovakia made recommendations.  64. Spain congratulated the Government on the ratification of the two Optional Protocols to the Convention on the Rights of the Child.  It made recommendations.   65. The Philippines commended the Government for establishing the Ministry of Human Rights, ratifying a number of core treaties and taking measures to improve the participation of women in political and economic life. Philippines noted progress in consolidating democratic governance, strengthening the rule of law and delivering basic services. However, the security challenge was having detrimental effects. Philippines made recommendations.  66. Sweden regretted the reinstatement of the death penalty. It noted the fact that more than 100 persons had been executed since May 2009. There were reports that trials had not met international standards and confessions were extracted through torture. Sweden expressed concern about violence against human rights defenders, journalists and trade unionists. Killings and disappearances had been reported. During 2009, the killing or brutal torture of homosexual men had become widespread, with accusations of involvement by security forces. Sweden made recommendations.  67. Oman noted that promoting and protecting human rights was accorded priority through guarantees in the Constitution, in law and in practice. It noted the ratification of most conventions and the establishment of the National Human Rights Commission.  68. Ukraine commended the efforts to establish the national human rights infrastructure. Despite the decline in violence, it noted the weak rule of law and violations against women and children. Ukraine noted with concern attacks on minority groups, sporadic killings and kidnappings. It considered that the election laws had not provided for fair representation of minorities and required changes. Ukraine considered that the Government should assume greater responsibility in protecting human rights. Ukraine made recommendations. 69. Chile acknowledged the efforts made in drafting a national report on respect for and the promotion of human rights, despite the particularly complex context faced.  Chile made recommendations 70. Argentina highlighted the efforts made in the transition towards the establishment of a stable democratic system guaranteeing the representation and participation of the Iraqi people. It noted in particular the establishment of the national institution for human rights, entrusted with drafting a human rights national plan and providing training for the public and private sectors. Argentina made recommendations.  71. Angola noted that developments must be assessed in the context of reconciliation and national reconstruction. With regard to the housing crisis, Angola asked about constraints encountered in carrying out policies aimed at ensuring adequate housing and how the international community could help. It stressed that education was fundamental to development. It asked about the major obstacles encountered in the effort to better protect women from violations. Angola made recommendations. 72. Latvia noted the Government’s commitment to democratic principles and the guarantee of human rights. It welcomed numerous pledges and commitments set out in the national report, including the commitment to cooperate with the special procedures of the Human Rights Council and their missions. Latvia made a recommendation. 73. Greece emphasized the fact that the country was party to the main international human rights instruments. Greece made recommendations.  74. Ghana inquired about the impact of the Ministry of Human Rights on the process aimed at overcoming the legacy of past human rights abuses and spreading a culture of human rights. It urged further protection measures and facilities for women and children. It applauded the Government’s admission that minorities had been subjected to grave violations. Ghana made recommendations. 75. Palestine appreciated the political will to try to achieve prosperity and overcome the deprivation resulting from the war, the economic sanctions imposed through the blockade and the lack of security over the previous three decades. It appreciated all efforts to confront terrorism and armed groups operating outside the law, and to maintain security and stability. Palestine made a recommendation. 76. Bangladesh appreciated the fact that the gender gap had been reduced in some areas. It noted the indication by UNICEF that the decline in health services since the early 1990s had lowered the average life expectancy, with treaty bodies also reporting a deteriorated health situation and a high maternal mortality rate. A long period of economic sanctions had also contributed to the deprivation of the enjoyment of social, economic and development rights. The international community needed to be forthcoming with assistance. Bangladesh made recommendations. 77. Qatar appreciated the way in which the report had been prepared and the information provided. It noted the constitutional, legal, judicial and institutional guarantees aimed at the protection of human rights. It referred to positive developments and the improvement in the well-being of the country’s citizens, despite the current difficulties, as detailed in the national report. Qatar made recommendations.  78. The delegation informed that the Ministry of Migration had been established to address the problems of internally displaced persons, refugees and victims of natural disasters and human trafficking. The Government had adopted a displacement policy defining the roles and needs of all involved, and substantial financial and service assistance was being provided by the Government in cooperation with international organizations. The Government had adopted a policy for voluntary return and integration. Financial and other incentives had been provided, and tens of thousands of families had effectively returned. 79. Iraq had agreed to visits by the Special Rapporteur on torture and the Representative of the Secretary-General on the rights of internally displaced persons. Iraq had received a visit by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict in 2008. Iraq had always been prepared for and open to visits by all Special Rapporteurs and representatives of the United Nations system. Iraq intended to submit overdue reports to treaty bodies by the end of 2010, in particular the reports on children’s rights.  80. Education was provided free of cost at all levels and without discrimination of any kind. The Government had, inter alia, doubled the portion of the budget set aside for education and research, increased the salaries of teachers and university professors, agreed with UNESCO to improve education in such areas as information and communications technology, and placed priority on protecting the copyrights of Iraqi scientists. II. Conclusions and/or recommendations 81. The recommendations formulated during the interactive dialogue and listed below enjoy the support of Iraq: 1. Consider the possibility of ratifying more human rights treaties, such as the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and the Convention relating to the Status of Refugees (Algeria); 2. Complete the process already started by Iraq, of accession and ratification of international conventions and treaties, in particular the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (Sudan); 3. Consider ratification of the optional protocols of core international human right treaties it has already ratified or is in the process of ratifying (Philippines) 4. Consider ratifying the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance and also accepting the competence of the relevant committee (Argentina);   5. Harmonize its Constitution and legislation with the accepted international law standards (Slovenia); 6. Continue to strengthen human rights principles of the newly adopted Constitution (Kazakhstan); 7. Ensure that its domestic legislation and practice are in full compliance with the requirements of article 18 of the ICCPR (Poland); 8. Strengthen efforts to harmonize national human rights legislation with the relevant international instruments (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya); 9. Bring the national law to conformity with the international human rights standards (Ukraine); 10. Complete the process of establishing the independent high commission for human rights (Algeria); 11. Move quickly to establish the Independent High Commission for Human Rights (IHCHR) and, notwithstanding budget pressures, ensure adequate funding for the IHCHR and the Ministry of Human Rights (Australia); 12. Establish, as soon as possible, through the allocation of a budget line and the appointment of its members, the Independent High Commission as a complementary body to the Human Rights Commission of the Council of Representatives (Spain); 13. Establish national human rights institution, in accordance with the Paris Principles (Pakistan);  14. Establish an independent human rights commission in accordance with the Paris Principles (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland); 15. Explore the possibility of establishing an independent national human rights institution in conformity with the Paris Principles (Malaysia); 16. Develop the institutional environment for the protection of human rights in Iraq (Qatar);  17. Continue the steps aiming at combating corruption and achieve the efforts to develop national mechanisms in this regard (Sudan);  18. Redouble its efforts to combat corruption and promote good governance with a view to achieving substantial improvements in this regard (Republic of Korea); 19. Implement effective oversight mechanisms within the judiciary to tackle corruption and to improve the quality and speed of the judicial process (Austria); 20. Strengthen its efforts to promote and protect human rights in Iraq (Saudi Arabia); 21. Undertake additional measures to protect rights of women and children (Ukraine); 22. Continue its utmost efforts to improve the civil, political, social, economic and cultural rights for the Iraqi people (Bangladesh); 23. Continue to establish democracy, good governance, rule of law and equality (Jordan); 24. Continue to implement a comprehensive security, economic, political and social welfare plan (Kazakhstan); 25. Achieve the national reconciliation project, foster solidarity among the Iraqi people, enshrine the bases of the national unity and ensure public security (Algeria); 26. Continue the process of national reconciliations in order to enshrine the bases of the national unity, stability and internal security (Sudan);  27. Commit to abide by international humanitarian law and international law (Kuwait); 28. Ensure that any collaboration agreement signed with other States or contracts adjudicated to private security companies, guarantee the obligation of respecting international standards for the protection of human rights , as well as establish an adequate mechanism supervising the compliance with these standards by the actors involved (Mexico);   29. Continue to pay attention and provide the necessary services to priority groups in order to promote them and offer them the opportunity to participate effectively in the construction of a better future for the Iraqi people (Tunisia); 30. Continue the fruitful cooperation with the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI)  in order to strengthen the human rights protection, while considering the difficult circumstances and the security situation in Iraq and taking into account the traditions of the Iraqi people (United Arab Emirates); 31. Continue to work with UNAMI and the international community to address human rights recommendations set out in the 1 January – 30 June 2009 UNAMI Human Rights report (Australia); 32. Significantly improve its cooperation with the United Nations treaty Bodies by submitting overdue reports (Norway); 33. Submit the second and third reports to the Committee on the Rights of the Child (Uruguay); 34. Consider issuing a standing invitation to all UN human rights special procedures (Brazil); 35. Consider extending a standing invitation to all special procedures of the human Right Council (Latvia); 36. Issue a standing invitation to all human rights special procedures (New Zealand); 37. Issue a standing invitation to the United Nations special procedures (Poland); 38. Extend a permanent and open invitation to the United Nations human rights special procedures (Chile); 39. Give priority to facilitating the visits requested by Special Rapporteurs of the Human Rights Council (Norway); 40. Deal positively with the requests for visits to Iraq by Special Rapporteurs and Representatives of the Secretary General (Qatar); 41. Advance in the promotion of gender equality and equity and study the necessary legislative reforms to follow international standards such as CEDAW (Uruguay); 42. Continue its efforts to improve the situation of women and empower them (Jordan); 43. Raise social awareness on the importance of women’s rights (Italy);  44. Further enhance measures, in cooperation with the international community, to protect and promote the rights of the child, including through strengthening the educational system and the provision of adequate food, housing and health services to the most vulnerable families and groups in society (Philippines); 45. Continue its gender-sensitive campaigns to create a more non.discriminatory environment (Bangladesh); 46. Exert more concrete efforts to fully realize the right to life, liberty and security of the person, as well as respect for the rule of law in national institutions (Republic of Korea);  47. Undertake to abolish the death penalty or, in the absence of abolition, respect international standards restricting the scope of its application (Canada); 48. Respect at least minimum standards, as long as it maintains death penalty (Belgium);  49. Take all necessary steps to eliminate torture and other inhuman punishments in prisons and detention facilities (Denmark); 50. Investigate promptly, effectively and independently allegations of torture in order to ensure that those responsible are brought to justice (Switzerland); 51. Increase its efforts at eradicating torture by launching independent and credible investigations into alleged cases of torture and holding those responsible to account and providing compensation and support to the victims (Sweden); 52. Consider inadmissible, the confessions obtained under torture or ill treatment and allow all detainees to prepare their defense and communicate with a lawyer of their choice (Switzerland);  53. Implement measures to ensure appropriate treatment of detainees, work to eliminate the detention of persons without charge or trial and ensure transparency for all sentences (Australia); 54. Complete the transfer of detainees to Ministry of Justice custody (United States); 55. Continue to improve conditions in Ministry of Justice-operated facilities and hold accountable any law enforcement official suspected of involvement in torture, abuse or coerced confessions (United States); 56. Make sure that all de facto detention facilities fall under the responsibility and direct authority of the government (Netherlands); 57. Unify the supervision of Iraq’s prisons and detention centers, which is currently under the jurisdiction of various authorities, under the Ministry of Justice so as to improve the condition of these facilities and the process of crime investigation and to guarantee transparency (Japan); 58. Invite the Special Rapporteur on Torture in order to examine the situation in all of Iraq’s detention facilities and formulate recommendations for appropriate reform (Canada);  59. Adopt measures to criminalize the recruitment of child soldiers, put an end to the impunity of persons involved in trafficking in organs or organizing child prostitution, and accompany these measures with a policy of access to basic services and to education for the most vulnerable children (France); 60. Ensure due monitoring, investigating and prosecuting the recruitment of minors for military purpose and provide efficient rehabilitation and reintegration schemes for the victims (Slovakia); 61. Consider enacting a specific law to combat trafficking in persons, with emphasis on the protection of the human rights of victims, especially women and children (Philippines); 62. Intensify efforts to address impunity and incidence of trafficking and domestic violence as well as sexual abuse of women and girls including by strengthening law enforcement and judicial system, recruiting more women in the police and judiciary, and organizing more gender awareness campaigns within the Iraqi armed forces and police (Malaysia); 63. Address the problem of domestic violence (Italy);  64. Strengthen policies and measures, including legislation in the area of domestic violence (Brazil);  65. Take all the necessary measures to fight against all forms of violence against women and proceed to investigate and punish those responsible (Uruguay); 66. Enact legislation to combat domestic violence and sexual violence and to ban female genital mutilation (France); 67. Put a decisive end to the practice of female genital mutilation (Greece);  68. Consider a legal reform in order to address also in an effective way the so-called “honour killings or crimes” (Italy); 69. Continue efforts to adequately respond to honour related violence, provide shelters for women in need, raise public awareness and prosecute the perpetrators as a matter of priority (Netherlands); 70. Strengthen measures in response to reported violence against women and girls, and, in the worst cases of honor crimes and end impunity (Japan);  71. Investigate cases of violence against women, particularly “honor crimes”, take measures to ensure that the perpetrators are brought to justice and provide measures of redress to women victims (Chile);  72. Investigate thoroughly crimes against women and minorities and fully implement laws intended to enforce constitutional protections for women and minorities, including laws against discrimination (United States); 73. Implement measures to address extrajudicial killings of persons on the basis of their actual or presumed sexual orientation (Netherlands); 74. Take action in order to end extrajudicial killings of persons on the basis of their sexual orientation (Greece);  75. Take all necessary steps to strengthen to neutrality and independence of its judiciary (Germany); 76. Take effective measures to ensure the independence of the judiciary and the right to access to justice (Argentina);  77. Adhere to international standards regarding fair trials, and address allegations of abuse of detainees, including juveniles (Ghana);  78. Restore the legitimacy and credibility of trials in the country (Germany); 79. Take all necessary steps to strengthen the adequate access to justice especially for vulnerable groups such as women (Germany); 80. Increase efforts to improve the quality and capacity of the judicial system (Austria);  81. Strengthen security for judicial staff and lawyers (Austria); 82. Speed up its justice reforms to comply with international standards (Slovakia); 83. Continue cooperating with the European Union EUJUST LEX Mission for the training of staff which is of great importance for consolidating the rule of law and strengthening judicial, prisons and police structures. In this context, expand the public recognition and awareness of the Mission and disseminate its objectives and results to the public (Spain); 84. Implement all necessary measures to ensure fair trial under all circumstances, investigate vigorously all allegations of torture and other forms of maltreatment and bring those who are responsible to justice (Netherlands); 85. Improve respect for human rights in its justice system, including by ensuring that all allegations of torture are thoroughly investigated and that any perpetrators brought to justice, and by promoting the use of forensic evidence in courts (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland); 86. Review the Penal Code and the Law on Criminal Proceedings in order to overcome shortcomings in the procedure and to ensure the right to fair trial, adequate defence and prompt access to justice for all (Bosnia and Herzegovina); 87. Continue to combat the culture of impunity (United States); 88. Take effective measures to systematically tackle impunity by improving training, including human rights training, of security and law enforcement officials (Austria); 89. Deepen its efforts to improve accountability structures with the view to eradicate impunity (Sweden); 90. Take effective measures to prevent and eliminate discrimination on the grounds of religion and belief in the recognition, exercise and enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms in all fields of civil, economic, political, social and cultural life (Poland); 91. Introduce, within its overall security policy, further measures to secure life of confessional groups and indigenous people, and further pursue its policy of involving the representatives of the latter in new political and social structure of Iraq (Armenia); 92. Improve its security situation and take necessary steps to enhance greater dialogue between and among various religious groups in the country (Nigeria); 93. Do more to ensure that the hard-fought freedom of expression is guaranteed by the government and protected under Iraqi laws and Iraqi courts (United States); 94. Take steps to end intimidation and abuse of journalists by government officials and hold all perpetrators of violence against and harassment of journalists fully accountable (United States); 95. Promptly investigate crimes and violations against human rights defenders and journalists and prosecute the perpetrators (Norway); 96. Investigate violations and attacks against journalists in order to ensure the necessary judicial stability for a functioning media (Germany); 97. Proceed to further actions in order to provide a safe working environment for journalists in the country (Greece);  98. Consider enacting a law that regulates freedom of the press (Qatar); 99. Better disseminate and ensure full observance of the Declaration on Human Rights Defenders (Norway); 100. Promote the development of a vibrant and effective civil society including by promulgating legislation in accordance with international human rights law, in particular to protect the rights of trade unions, NGO’s and freedom of the media (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland); 101. Hold the next elections in an inclusive and transparent manner (Brazil); 102. Make efforts to ensure that all Iraqis, including religious minorities, can participate in elections that are safe, fair and free of intimidation and violence (United States); 103. Take action to ensure the Supreme National Commission for Accountability and Justice is independent and operates towards the goal of free and fair elections with participation of all parties (New Zealand); 104. Continue to support healthcare services by exploring the possibility of establishing a system of medical insurance that would ensure healthcare coverage to all social groups, especially the poorest (Morocco);  105. Continue its policies to achieve the goal set in 2006 of building more than 3.5 million dwellings by 2015 (Angola); 106. Strengthen its efforts in the area of development as well as the implementation of the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) especially, concerning the enrolment at all levels of education, the realization of the right to food and the decrease of maternal and child mortality rates (Algeria);  107. Continue its efforts for all children to have access to education and health (Bangladesh); 108. Strengthen efforts to improve the education system, reduce the dropout rates and eradicate illiteracy by inter alia, allocating more resources in the education sector and strengthening cooperation with the international community and organizations including UNICEF and UNESCO (Malaysia); 109. Continue efforts aiming at combating school drop-out and illiteracy through parallel programmes to the formal education system, that encourage families to register children in schools and adults in programmes for the eradication of illiteracy (Morocco); 110. Continue its policies aimed at strengthening the educational system (Angola); 111. Spread the culture of human rights in all sectors and institutions of society, in particular legislators and the staff of the judicial system and review its education curricula with a view to incorporating human rights principles (Lebanon); 112. Disseminate the culture of human Rights through school curricula (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya); 113. Make efforts to enhance security in the schools in order to increase the participation of children in the education system (Bosnia and Herzegovina); 114. Ensure the protection of the rights of minorities (Ukraine); 115. Ensure that all abuses against ethnic, linguistic or religious minorities are duly investigated and prosecuted, including in the context of the examination of the situation of the residents of Camp Ashraf (Belgium); 116. Intensify its efforts to support the rights and freedoms of minorities by undertaking prompt and impartial investigations into reports of attacks against religious and ethnic minorities and bring to justice those responsible (Ghana);  117. Enhance the efforts to improve the security situation and protection of minorities (Denmark); 118. Continue its positive initiatives towards prioritizing minority issues and guaranteeing the security of minorities and ensure that the situation of minorities is dealt with in accordance with human rights (Lebanon); 119. Ensure the rights of religious and ethnic minorities. In this regard, respect and guarantee the rights of Iraqi Turkmen and other peoples who are integral with Iraq in accordance with relevant international obligations (Kazakhstan); 120. Increase the protection of ethnic and religious minorities as well as women, human rights defenders and journalists (Switzerland); 121. Continue to pay close attention to its obligations under international humanitarian and international human rights law, including with respect to foreign nationals and stateless persons (Australia); 122. Ensure the rights of migrants and ethnic and religious minorities (Bosnia and Herzegovina); 123. Encourage the collective return of the Iraqi refugees, ensure their rights and reintegrate them into the unified Iraqi society (Morocco); 124. Adopt and apply measures aimed at guaranteeing full respect for human rights and international humanitarian law for all refugees (Chile);  125. Strengthen policies and further seek international cooperation to ensure the human rights of Internally Displaced Persons, including measures for their return or resettlement (Brazil);  126. Develop a national plan to provide assistance and compensation to internally displaced persons (Chile); 127. Pay special attention to women from marginal groups who have been affected by armed conflict and displacement (Norway); 128. Build mechanisms which would enable provision of adequate humanitarian assistance to the large number of internally displaced persons (Bosnia and Herzegovina); 129. Continue its efforts to combat terrorism in order to ensure security and stability and to allow the Iraqi migrants to return and contribute to building their country (Kuwait); 130. Incorporate a human rights-based approach in its every effort to achieve sustainable security and development, particularly in anti-terrorism operations (Republic of Korea); 131. Continue its efforts to combat terrorism and exert every possible effort to protect and promote human rights, in spite of all existing obstacles and threats, keeping away from external and regional interference that contributes to undermining the security and stability in Iraq (Palestine); 132. Establish an effective and inclusive process to follow-up on UPR recommendations (Norway); 133. Continue its cooperation with the international and regional human rights mechanisms, in particular in the area of technical assistance and training (Saudi Arabia); 134. Request technical assistance from the relevant international human rights mechanisms, whenever there is a need to carry on building the capacities of the country to face challenges, in particular in the area of the judiciary and the preparation of human rights periodic reports (Algeria); 135. Request and be given, based on its assessed needs, necessary technical and financial assistance to address its human rights concerns (Pakistan). 82. The following recommendations will be examined by Iraq, which will provide responses in due time. The response of Iraq to these recommendations will be included in the outcome report adopted by the Human Rights Council at its fourteenth session: 1. Ratify the Optional Protocols to the two Covenants and CEDAW (Austria); 2. Ratify the main pending human rights instruments, particularly the two Optional Protocols to ICCPR; the Convention against Torture and its Optional Protocol (Chile);  3. Sign and ratify the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment and its Optional Protocol; Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights; Second Optional Protocol to the Covenant on Civil and Political Rights; International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance; Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women; Optional Protocol of the Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights; Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and its Optional Protocol (Spain); 4. Accede to the following international instruments: Optional Protocol to the Covenant on Civil and Political Rights; Second Optional Protocol to the Covenant on Civil and Political Rights; Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women; Convention against Torture; Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture; International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families (Argentina); 5. Ratify the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court (Mexico); 6. Step-up its efforts to guarantee civil, political, economic, social and cultural rights of the Iraqi people, including equality before the law without discrimination of any kind and take appropriate measures to respect international human rights instruments and United Nations Treaty Bodies recommendations (Chile); 7. Commit fully to the implementation of the United Nations Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (Italy); 8. Ensure that Iraq’s legislation guarantees de jure and de facto non discrimination against women (Mexico);  9. Re-establish the moratorium on death penalty in all cases. If not, extend that moratorium to the cases that are contrary to international law, including the death penalty for sexual orientation (Spain); 10. Abolish legal provisions allowing for reduced sentences for so-called “honor crimes” and undertake an awareness-raising campaign (Austria); 11. Carry-out an awareness raising campaign against domestic and gender based violence, and, in specific terms, against offences against women for reasons of “honor”, and amend article 128 of the Criminal Code which identifies the commission of an offence “with honourable motives” as a “mitigating excuse” (Spain); 12. Suspend the application of article 128 in the Criminal Code, with a view to revoke it (Norway); 13. Suspend Article 128 of the Iraqi Penal Code and put in place steps to repeal it completely (New Zealand); 14. Repeal article 128 of the Criminal Code which identifies “the commission of an offence with honourable motives” as a mitigating excuse (Canada). 83. The following recommendations did not enjoy the support of Iraq: 1. Reduce the scope of crimes subject to the death penalty, specifically regarding all non-violent crimes, and work towards the total abolition of the death penalty (Norway); 2. Establish an immediate moratorium on the death penalty, with a view to its final abolition in the future (Belgium); 3. Establish as a first step, a moratorium on all executions followed by a complete abolition of the death penalty (Switzerland);  4. Take all the necessary measures for the establishment of a moratorium on death penalty in Iraq, as a first step towards its abolition (Uruguay); 5. Re-introduce the de facto moratorium of the death penalty with a view to its abolition (Italy); 6. Re-establish a moratorium on the death penalty with a view of its elimination (Netherlands); 7. Reinstate the moratorium on the death penalty and proceed to its complete abolition (Greece);  8. Apply a moratorium on death penalty as a first step towards its effective abolition (Argentina);  9. Take all necessary legal steps to abolish the death penalty and, in the meantime, reintroduce a de facto moratorium (Denmark); 10. Resume the de facto suspension of the death penalty pending its abolition (Sweden); 11. Abolish the death penalty or, if not, establish a moratorium, consistent with Australia’s support for its universal abolition (Australia); 12. Abolish the death penalty or, otherwise, establish a moratorium (Chile);  13. Establish an immediate moratorium on the use of the death penalty and commute all current death sentences (New Zealand); 14. Amend the concerned legislation to establish an immediate moratorium on the death penalty with a view of abolishing the capital punishment entirely in line with the United Nations General Assembly resolutions 62/149 and 63/168 as well as the second Optional Protocol to ICCPR and transfer the existing death sentences to imprisonment terms (Slovakia); 15. Halt immediately all executions and implement a moratorium on the use of the death penalty (Canada); 16. Halt all executions and establish a moratorium on the death penalty with a view to abolishing the capital punishment (Slovenia); 17. Impose a moratorium on pending executions and review the Penal Code with the aim of a complete abolition of the death penalty (Hungary);  18. Establish the moratorium on the death penalty (Ukraine); 19. Establish a moratorium on executions (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland); 20. Immediately implement a moratorium on executions and work further towards fully abolishing the death penalty (Austria); 21. Commit to the path of abolishing the capital punishment by adopting as soon as possible, a moratorium and commuting the sentences that have already been pronounced (France); 22. Abolish the death penalty (Germany); 23. Investigate all allegations of persecution based on gender and sexual orientation and that charges be brought against those behind these crimes (Norway); 24. Ensure all reports of human rights violations, including those against religious minorities and homosexuals, are investigated and prosecuted (Australia); 25. Fully investigate all allegations of persecution based on gender and sexual orientation (Canada); 26. Decriminalize homosexuality and ensure that the authors of violence against homosexuals are brought to justice (France); 27. Ensure that Iraq’s national legislation guarantees the rights of boys, girls and adolescents and establishes 18 as the age of adulthood, especially regarding penal responsibility (Mexico). 84. All conclusions and/or recommendations contained in the present report reflect the position of the submitting State(s) and/or the State under review. They should not be construed as endorsed by the Working Group as a whole. III. Voluntary Pledges and commitments 85. Review the reservations which the Republic of Iraq made when acceding to international human rights treaties. 86. Strengthen efforts to bring domestic human rights legislation into line with international human rights law. 87. Cooperate with the special procedures of the Human Rights Council and their missions. 88. Complete the procedures for ratifying the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman and Degrading Treatment or Punishment and the Convention on the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance. 89. Accede to the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. 90. Provide regular periodic reports to the United Nations treaty bodies and submit them in a timely fashion. 91. Complete the procedure for establishing the independent Higher Commission for Human Rights. 92. Draw up a national five-year plan for the promotion and advancement of human rights. 93. Adopt a five-year plan on human rights education, focusing on students and young persons of both sexes, in line with the World Programme for Human Rights Education. Annex Composition of the delegation The delegation of Iraq was headed by H.E. Mrs. Wijdan M. Salim, Minister for Human Rights and composed of 17 members: • Mr. Asghar Al-Musawi, Deputy Minister of Migration; • Mr. Faris Zarawi, Ambassador MOFA; • Mr. Saad Al-Ibrahem, Director General of the National Institute for Human Rights, Ministry of Human Rights. • Mr. Abdulsttar Mustafa, Judge-Media Center of Judiciary; • Mr. Dhari Karafi,Judge in the High Council for Justice; • Mr. Mahdi Mitib, Advisor Prime Minister of Iraq; • Mr. Sharef Almurtada Al-Bakaa, Director General in Ministry of Justice; • Mr. Hasan Fazaz, Director General, Ministry of Health; • Mrs. Tvuga Omer Rashid, General Director of Human Rights, Ministry of Human Rights, Kurdistan Region Government. • Mrs. Wedad Al-Qasiy, Advisor in Ministry of Justice; • Mr. Abbas Kadhem, Chargé d’Affaires, Permanent Mission of Iraq to the United Nations Office at Geneva; • Mr. Thamer Al-Khazraji, Manager in Ministry of Higher Education; • Mr. Saad Hussein, Ass. Of Director General Ministry Human Rights; • Mr. Moath Al-Mulahwaish, Manager Ministry of Human Rights; • Mr. Riadh Yalda, Second Secretary, Permanent Mission of Iraq to	 the United Nations Office at Geneva; • Mr. Dhyaa Kadhum, Manager in Ministry of Planning; • Mrs. Nidaa Al-Ajeeli, Manager Relations in Ministry of Planning. 