United Nations 	A/HRC/14/3 Distr.: General 17 March 2010 Original: English General Assembly Human Rights Council Fourteenth session Agenda item 6 Universal Periodic Review Report of the Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review* Nicaragua * 	Previously issued under document symbol A/HRC/WG.6/7/L.2; minor revisions have been added under the authority of the secretariat of the Human Rights Council on the basis of editorial changes made by States through the ad referendum procedure.  The annex to the present report is circulated as received. Contents Paragraphs Page Introduction............................................................................................................. 1–4 3 
I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process................................................ 5–89 3 
A. Presentation by the State under review........................................................... 5–31 3 
B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review........................ 32–89 7 
II. Conclusions and/or recommendations..................................................................... 90–93 14 Annex Composition of the delegation ......................................................................................................... 23 Introduction 1. The Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review, established in accordance with Human Rights Council resolution 5/1, held its seventh session from 8 to 19 February 2010.  The review of Nicaragua was held at the 2nd meeting, on 8 February 2010. The delegation of Nicaragua was headed by Ana Isabel Morales Mazun, Minister for the Interior. At its 6th meeting, held on 10 February 2010, the Working Group adopted the report on Nicaragua. 2. On 7 September 2009, the Human Rights Council selected the following group of rapporteurs (troika) to facilitate the review of Nicaragua: Brazil, the Philippines and Zambia. 3. In accordance with paragraph 15 of the annex to resolution 5/1, the following documents were issued for the review of Nicaragua: (a) A national report submitted/written presentation made in accordance with paragraph 15 (a) (A/HRC/WG.6/7/NIC/1); (b) A compilation prepared by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) in accordance with paragraph 15 (b) (A/HRC/WG.6/7/NIC/2); (c) A summary prepared by OHCHR in accordance with paragraph 15 (c) (A/HRC/WG.6/7/NIC/3).  4. A list of questions prepared in advance by Argentina, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Germany, the Netherlands, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland was transmitted to Nicaragua through the troika. The questions are available on the extranet of the universal periodic review. I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process A. Presentation by the State under review 5. The delegation of Nicaragua stated that the national report had been drawn up by an inter-institutional commission under the coordination of the President’s Office with wide consultations and participation of all sectors of society. The report allowed Nicaragua to identify both strengths and shortcomings to be overcome in order to guarantee human rights to all Nicaraguans. 6. The universal periodic review process provided Nicaragua with a unique opportunity to share its national experiences and to highlight what it had done to promote human rights and exchange good practices. Nicaragua expressed the conviction that the recommendations resulting from the review would be based on the successful experiences of other States and serve to support specific proposals that Nicaragua could adapt to its own situation. 7. Nicaragua became a member of the Human Rights Council in the belief that consensus, dialogue and cooperation were fundamental tools to strengthen its system for the promotion and protection of human rights.  In Nicaragua, the promotion of human rights means making each individual aware that he or she has human rights and can enjoy them. A person who does not enjoy access to health, education, food or appropriate housing is deprived of a decent and free life. The protection of human rights is an obligation for all States. Protecting means guaranteeing that everyone has the same living standards, are all equal before the law and that the recognition of violations brings with it the right to reparations for victims. 8. Nicaragua has an array of international instruments, many of which it is a party. However, being a party to these instruments is not sufficient if States do not display political will and true commitment to implementing obligations entered into these instruments.  The primary responsibility and obligation to promote and protect human rights rests with the State. Nicaragua was fostering strategies to promote human development, thereby eradicating the poverty inherited from exclusionary social and economic policies. However, a nation deprived of the right to development is condemned to living in poverty and underdevelopment. States would not be able to achieve the Millennium Development Goals as long as international cooperation was limited and politically conditioned.  The full enjoyment of human rights could not be provided as long as international trade continues to be unjust. As long as there were multinationals more powerful than States themselves, nations such as Nicaragua would continue to be impoverished. The capitalist system had failed the entire world, as could be seen from the financial and economic crisis. 9. Nicaragua was victim of a 16-year-old system that limited people’s rights. Poverty deprived Nicaraguans of the possibility of a decent life.  Thousands of Nicaraguans had been forced to migrate, thus exposing themselves to suffering and oblivion. 10. Nicaragua had set as a priority recovering for the Nicaraguan people the rights that were denied. Nicaragua has a national human development plan for 2009-2011, which provides for development strategies and a vision of human rights, without discrimination of any kind.  It included a national system for well-being and social equity, with clear policies and programmes regarding food, health, education, social housing, drinking water and social security.  With regard to economic, social and cultural rights, the main challenge was fighting poverty. 11. In 2007, the Government successfully promoted a programme of food production vouchers to benefit 75,000 rural families over a period of five years through a mechanism of transfers, which provides them with means of production.  The programme was extended to the “zero usury” financing programme. 12. Food security had become crucial in an international setting experiencing a world crisis. In Nicaragua, the right to food was constitutionally guaranteed.  The Parliament recently approved a law on food and nutritional sovereignty and security, allowing Nicaragua to set up complementary programmes such as the “zero hunger” programme, the food production vouchers scheme, housing vouchers, schools and market gardens, programmes for comprehensive food and child nutrition, and school lunches and milk programmes. Various United Nations agencies, including the Special Rapporteur on the right to food, have recognized the programmes as models of good practices. 13. Education was totally free of charge. Between 2006 and 2009, in solidarity with Cuba, Nicaragua supported the programme, “Yes, I can!”, with which it had reduced illiteracy in the country to less than 5 per cent, a situation certified by UNESCO.  It had established five educational policies to improve the quality of the educational system and to decentralize it.  Nicaragua had also a sustainable school food programme cited as model programme by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. 14. Nicaraguans had equal access to the right to health. The State prohibitedall charges for health services. .   Nicaragua had managed to reduce the mortality from tuberculosis to half of the level recorded in 1990. Since 2007, Nicaragua had reached a low-risk level category for malaria. It has recorded 78 municipal areas out of 153 where there was no transmission of malaria. Since 2008, it guaranteed anti-retro-viral treatment for 734 HIV-positive people. 15. Labour had been recognized as both a right and a social responsibility. The State provided for full and productive employment for all Nicaraguans.  The unemployment rate was 8 per cent for the total economically active population. Reducing the rate of unemployment was a priority of the human development plan. 16. The right to housing had been a constitutional right since 1987.  Nicaragua had introduced a policy with guidelines for granting subsidies and for the establishment of secure mortgage funds, the establishment of credit funds and a bank for construction materials, as well as programmes for legalizing the right to property, particularly housing projects, and the recent agreement with private banks for the expansion of these social housing programmes through the investment of $90 million. 17. Social security was a constitutional right. Through the national plan for human development, the Government was currently working on a proposal for further changes to the current system. 18. The right to a healthy environment was also a constitutional right. The national human rights plan had adopted principles providing for the defence and protection of nature and the environment. Among the wide-ranging programmes in this area, Nicaragua was currently implementing the fourth programme directed and guided in a sustainable way for dealing with national forest ecosystems. Another initiative was the natural resources programme, aimed at providing drinking water supplies and the treatment of waste water, increasing reforested land areas, and the improvement and expansion of protected areas. 19. With regard to civil and political rights, the Government was focused on strengthening the rule of law and legal security.  It was promoting a national agreement in the area of criminal justice, with policies and strategies to strengthen the criminal justice system.  Nicaragua was seeking a fair and accessible criminal justice system that would preserve and foster the principles of legal security. Through this important process, the new criminal procedural code had gone from inquisitorial to an adversarial system. 20. The Nicaraguan police had a sense of belonging to the community. Deep respect for human beings and human rights was a cross-cutting principle of police doctrine. A recent report on human development concerning civil security drawn up by the United Nations Development Programme recognized that the police enjoyed credibility and was is one of the best police forces in Central America, showing that Nicaragua was one of the safest countries in the region. 21. The prison system was based on the penitentiary regime law and the law on execution of sentences, which provided that their activities be carried out in conformity with constitutional principles, laws and regulations, the code of conduct and international human rights instruments ratified by Nicaragua. 22. Gender equality and the proper position of women in all sectors of society were fundamental and had a cross-cutting foundation. Priority was given to the role played by women in decision-making and in the development of public policies allowing women to be empowered, thus helping to eradicate violence against women. The State had decided to establish units within its institutions tomonitor women’s rights through the “love programme”. 23. Nicaragua was striving to ensure that children were given the right to a happy life and to guarantee to them free social services. The State had enacted a code on childhood and adolescents, implementing a new model for juvenile criminal justice system, which guaranteed due process of law and was orientated towards integrating adolescents into families and the society. By reforming the criminal code, Nicaragua had moved from a penalty-oriented justice system towards a juvenile justice system with a rehabilitative emphasis. 24. In Nicaragua, everyone was equal before the law and had the right to equal protection by the law. The new criminal code defined and criminalized discrimination as an offence. Nicaragua was multi-ethnic in nature, and the State recognized the existence of indigenous peoples, who were entitled to the rights sets out in the Constitution.  The State had enacted a communal property law for indigenous peoples in the autonomous regions of the Atlantic coast, the development of which was part of the national development plan and a major pillar in its strategy. 25. In order to ensure the implementation of the plan, the Government had institutionalized a development secretariat for the Atlantic coast that is responsible for coordinating autonomous regional councils with national ministries. In 2009, the State had restored to two indigenous communities of the Caribbean their right to ancestral lands, granting 12 land titles that represent 12.8 per cent of the national territory, benefiting 152 indigenous and Afro-descents communities comprising 58,000 people. In the rest of the country, the State had handed over 56,868 title deeds, restoring lands rights to more than 262,562 people. 26. Nicaragua had ratified the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and the protocol thereto. The law on the prevention and rehabilitation of people with disabilities was being reformed to bring it into line with the Convention. In 2008, Parliament had adopted the law for the protection of the rights of persons with mental illnesses. Nicaragua, in solidarity with Cuba, was implementing through public health centres a care programme for these groups called “All of us with you”. 27. The new criminal code had decriminalized sexual relations between persons of the same sex and thus provided for the right to free sexual orientation. The Office of the Prosecutor for the Defence of Human Rights had recently appointed a special prosecutor for sexual diversity. 28. The Constitution recognized the right to freedom of association without discrimination and the right to freedom of expression in public and private, individually and collectively. In Nicaragua, all citizens enjoyed full freedom of expression. There is no censorship of any type.  A law guaranteed access for all to public information. State institutions, through the Office of Coordination of Public Information, guaranteed implementation and compliance with the law. 29. The Government took this opportunity to denounce the media campaign against the Government of Nicaragua by owners of media and opposition political parties; for example, during the visit of the Special Rapporteur on the right to food, his statements were subjected to manipulation and censorship by the media, which prompted the United Nations to publicly rectify the information. 30. Nicaragua had a model of media ownership that allowed for the existence of small-and medium-sized owners, with full freedom of expression and no censorship. There were 340 radio broadcasts and more than 70 television channels and cable companies. were are more than 20 press publications in circulation, including newspapers and magazines, as well as electronic publications. 31. Regarding abortion, legal amendments reflected the exercise of sovereignty, and had been adopted by the parliamentary majority in the national assembly.  This was clearly an issue of sovereignty, not a religious one. The majority of Nicaraguans believed that the right to life of the unborn was important. Those who opposed the amendment could seize the courts; in fact,many cases had been brought before the Supreme Court to challenge the constitutionality of the amendment, remedies which were still pending. Medical staff were not forbidden to provide medical care when the life of the mother was in danger. B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review 32. During the interactive dialogue, 47 delegations made statements. Additional statements by the 19 delegations that could not be delivered during the dialogue owing to time constraints are posted on the extranet of the universal periodic review when available.1 33. Bahrain noted the progress made in protecting human rights and basic freedoms. Nicaragua was party to 13 international human rights treaties. It recognized the national development plan, which would prevent domestic violence. It noted the programmes to improve citizens’ life, such as those against hunger and poverty and for food security. Bahrain asked about efforts made to combat poverty. 34. Algeria noted the remarks by President Bouteflika in 2007 during President Ortega’s visit, that Algeria and Nicaragua were united in the promotion of United Nations objectives and principles, as well as for the protection of human rights. It appreciated the human development plan, the programmes against poverty, and improving the situation of education. It made recommendations. 35. Qatar noted that Nicaragua was a party to most international and regional treaties, and welcomed cooperation with United Nations mechanisms. It appreciated the achievements in ensuring free education and reducing the illiteracy rate. Qatar made a recommendation. 36. Cuba stated the Sandinista Revolution had granted Nicaraguans access to human rights, but a criminal war financed and led by the Empire and several neo-liberal Governments had deprived the country of it. Cuba congratulated the initiatives taken by the Government and denounced the illegal actions against Nicaragua, particularly the denial of international assistance owing to interference and intents of domination. It commended the poverty reduction strategy and progress on the right to food, health, education and for combating discrimination. It highlighted the free and universal access to education and health attained since 2007, noting that illiteracy was eradicated in 2009. It noted progress made in the elimination of discrimination and for the protection of vulnerable groups. Cuba made recommendations. 37. Pakistan appreciated the consultations involving civil society during the preparation of the report. Nicaragua was a party to 13 of the 16 key international human rights treaties and its periodic reporting. Pakistan noted the legislative and administrative steps to realize economic, social, cultural, civil and political rights, and human rights training for its army, police force and other public employees. This was a good practice to be replicated. It commended the substantial reduction in illiteracy by launching a national literacy campaign, and noted the reestablishment of free education for all, asking more about this experience and its implications. Nicaragua was expanding its access to criminal justice, and had expressed its desire to use alternative dispute settlement mechanisms. Hence, Pakistan asked for more details thereon and on the justice system reform, particularly the introduction of adversarial criminal procedures in place of the inquisitorial system. 38. The Libyan Arab Jamahiriya welcomed the efforts to fight poverty and guarantee food to all. It noted that efforts should be made to improve the living conditions of women to ensure gender equality. It made a recommendation. 39. Slovenia noted with concern that violence against women was not classified as a crime in legislation but simply as domestic violence, and the high prevalence of rape.  Denmark, Uruguay, Japan, Poland, Switzerland, Argentina, Luxembourg, Iraq, Guatemala, China, Angola, Slovakia, Nigeria, Costa Rica, Ecuador, Peru, Palestine, Ghana and Portugal. Prison conditions were alarming and continued to deteriorate. It asked about measures intended to address overcrowding in prisons and detention centres and to improve overall prison conditions. It made recommendations. 40. Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) noted that Nicaragua was part of the Bolivarian Alliance of the Peoples of Our America, a space of encounter to face common challenges, under socialist principles of solidarity and mutual complimentarity. It recognized policies to guarantee economic, social and cultural rights, particularly education, access to which was guaranteed to all in equality of conditions and free of charge. It noted the successful national literacy campaign “Yes, I can!”, leading to recognition by UNESCO of Nicaragua as a territory free of illiteracy. It highlighted programmes such as “more education”, “better education” and “all education”. It made recommendations. 41. The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea appreciated the measures taken in civil, political, economic, social and cultural rights. It highlighted the policies to foster services for people, create a fair market free from exploitation and unlawful practices, and to develop networks of economic entities. It noted the measures aimed at improving the condition of vulnerable groups. 42. Sri Lanka noted that Nicaragua had overcome challenges in the protection and promotion of civil, political, economic and cultural rights, and commended the efforts to further promote and protect them. Its participation in the Human Rights Council was a demonstration of its willingness to engage with the international community.  Sri Lanka welcomed the national human development plan, and noted with satisfaction the strengthening of the rule of law and legal security. It noted Nicaragua’s key challenge was poverty and the importance attached to economic, social and cultural rights. It noted a need to protect vulnerable groups further. It made recommendations. 43. Bolivia (Plurinational State of) highlighted the progress made by the Sandinista Popular Revolution and the implementation of the human development plan. It noted the strategy to combat poverty and the cooperative networks promoting solidarity, food security and sovereignty. Illiteracy had almost been eradicated, free education had been re.established, universal access to health service was an ongoing effort and the maternal and child mortality had been reduced. Nicaragua acknowledged the rights of indigenous peoples to their culture and identity, and their traditional collective system of land tenure and usage. It noted that the new Penal Code defined discrimination as a criminal offence. It acknowledged Nicaragua’s commitment and interaction with the Human Rights Council and the treaty bodies. It made recommendations. 44. Canada appreciated the efforts made to strengthen the normative human rights framework, including through ratification of the second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture. Canada welcomed the decriminalization of consenting same-sex relations and the commitment to strengthen the rule of law and consolidate democracy. Canada was concerned about the trend towards narrowing democratic space, threats to political associations and freedom of expression, and threats against human rights defenders and those who criticize the Government. Canada noted with concern the lack of impartiality and independence in judiciary and developments inconsistent with the Constitution, such as the 2009 decision by the Constitutional Chamber of the Supreme Court to eliminate the constitutional ban on the consecutive and continuous re-election of officials. Canada made recommendations. 45. The Islamic Republic of Iran commended the efforts and commitments made for the promotion and protection of human rights, including the justice system reform; the measures against drug trafficking, human trafficking and organized crime; the national plan of action for the prevention of domestic and sexual violence; and the newly implemented Refugee Protection Act, described by UNHCR as the most advanced in the region. It appreciated the measures taken to enhance economic, social and environmental rights, despite the global economic crisis. It noted the cooperation with international human rights mechanisms. It made recommendations. 46. Uzbekistan welcomed the broad participation of civil society in preparation of the national report. It noted the consistent steps made to guarantee civil, political, economic, social, cultural rights and fundamental freedoms. Domestic legislation incorporated human rights norms, including the rights of indigenous people, the prohibition of discrimination of all forms, access to education and the right to health care. Uzbekistan welcomed the fact that Nicaragua was a party to 13 human rights treaties and recognized the competency of a number of supervisory bodies. Uzbekistan made a recommendation. 47. Kyrgyzstan appreciated the establishment of the special commission on rights of indigenous peoples and ethnic communities, and the results achieved in education. It noted the decrease in maternal and infant mortality rates and progress made in gender equality. 48. Egypt commended the human rights training for public employees, and for including it in the curricula of the army and police academies, and the establishment of the Office of the Procurator for the Defence of Human Rights in accordance with the Paris Principles. It highlighted the establishment of a dedicated department for women and children to provide psychosocial support to victims of human trafficking and sexual exploitation, and the awareness-raising campaigns on violence against women. It made recommendations. 49. The United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland welcomed the human rights training and the creation of a gender violence unit within the public prosecutor’s office. It asked about the plans to improve detention conditions in police cells and prisons. It encouraged greater civil society collaboration to ensure that women and children had access to independent legal and medical assistance, and encouraged action by the government to change perceptions towards disabled people, sufferers of HIV/AIDS and lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender groups. It made recommendations. 50. Norway appreciated the fact that Nicaragua had ratified most universal and regional human rights treaties and had resumed the practice of submitting periodic reports. Norway was concerned by the reported discrimination of the LGBT population and welcomed the decriminalization of homosexual relations in the 2008 Penal Code and the appointment, first in the region, of a Special Ombudsman for the Rights of Sexual Diversity.  Norway shared the concern raised by civil society, the Ombudsman and the United Nations at the criminalization of therapeutic abortion, and noted Nicaragua’s reassurance that women would be given legal assistance when their lives were in danger. It shared the concern raised by, inter alia, the Human Rights Committee about reports depicting a difficult working environment for human rights defenders and journalists. It made recommendations. 51. The Syrian Arab Republic congratulated the comprehensive and transparent description of the human rights situation in the national report. It commended Nicaragua for the new Constitution, the trend to empowering people to protect their human rights, the efforts made to reform the judicial system, the new juvenile criminal system, providing for family and social integration, and the efforts made to advance economic, social and cultural rights, such as the rights to food, health, and education. It made recommendations. 52. Viet Nam noted the measures, legal and judicial reforms and plans of action to protect fundamental rights and freedoms and democracy in the areas of education, health care, job creation, social security, rights of vulnerable groups, including women, children, persons with disabilities and indigenous people. It welcomed the human development plan and noted that Nicaragua was party to a majority of international human rights instruments, close cooperation with the United Nations human rights mechanisms, special procedures and treaty bodies. It made recommendations. 53. The Russian Federation positively assessed developments in economic, political, judicial and social areas, and the implementation of programmes in poverty reduction, access to housing, the fight against illiteracy and poor health. It noted the efforts made to strengthen the national human rights system, its accession to a number of international human rights treaties and active participation in international cooperation, including in the Council. It made a recommendation. 54. The Lao People’s Democratic Republic welcomed the achievements in the implementation of the development strategy with a civil power model, citizen participation and consultation, aimed at reinforcing human rights by promoting national welfare and social equity. It commended the country’s compliance with its international human rights obligations. It welcomed the establishment of relevant institutions and mechanisms to promote and protect human rights. It made recommendations. 55. Mexico commended the efforts made to protect human rights, highlighting actions to eliminate poverty, promote universal access to health and education, and the drastic reduction in illiteracy. It urged the conclusion of the justice system reform. Mexico noted Nicaragua’s challenges regarding the application of international human rights standards, suggesting that it seek technical assistance from international and regional organizations. It asked about the results of the programmes to eliminate gender disparity, particularly regarding access to good working conditions, credits, land tenure and basic social services. It made recommendations. 56. The United Arab Emirates welcomed the efforts made in reconstruction and national unity. It noted Nicaragua’s interest in protection and promotion of human rights and that, despite difficult economic conditions, Nicaragua placed citizens at the centre of development efforts. It enquired about Nicaragua’s efforts to enhance education as guaranteed by the Constitution. 57. Panama noted its historical political, economic and cultural ties with Nicaragua. It commended Nicaragua for establishing special procurators for children and juveniles, indigenous peoples, persons living with disabilities and persons deprived of their liberty, and the special procurator for citizens’ participation. Panama also commended it for ratifying the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and implementing the “love programme”, providing focused assistance to children and juveniles with disabilities. It requested information on public policies and practices to improve literacy of persons with disabilities, and to improve opportunities for them. 58. Regarding violence against women, deaths had different causes; in 2009, there had been 31 cases, of which 23 parricides, six assassinations and two homicides. The female population was 2,250,000. Legislators had not included the crime of femicide in the Penal Code, but it was punished through existing legislation, with penalties from 15 to 30 years of imprisonment. Aggravating circumstances included abuse of authority and discrimination on the basis of gender. 59. Nicaragua was more concerned with family violence and injuries, which in 2009 amounted to 9,213 cases, including sexual abuse, harassment, sexual exploitation, incest and rape. Nicaragua had established a special structure within the police to care for victims of these crimes (women and children police stations). At the end of the 1990s, Nicaragua had 35 national delegations, 21 of which at the department level, seven were municipal and seven were district offices for the capital. Together with civil society organization and procurators, Nicaragua had established seven shelters for victims of family violence with the aid of the Spanish Agency for International Cooperation. 60. Nicaragua was implementing a gender policy leading to the empowerment of women and encouraging preventive action in the political, economic and organizational fields. A total of 327 training activities had been conducted on the law of equal opportunities, gender violence, security for citizens and family violence, prevention of violence and citizen participation model, including indigenous and Afro- descendant populations. 61. Regarding prisons, United Nations minimum standards are observed.  There were eight centres with 4,742 places currently occupied by 5,952 detainees.  Overcrowding rates amounted to 25.52 per cent.  Nicaragua faced the challenge of improving detainee living conditions.  In 2007 and 2008, studies were conducted on pre-investment in two new prisons. 62. With regard to training and work in penitentiary system, 1,200 employees (98 per cent of penitentiary officers trained in human rights) had been trained. 63. A total of 75 per cent of police officers had been trained in human rights and to fight corruption. 64. Regarding the legitimacy of the electoral process, the Constitution stated that the right to vote was guaranteed by the electoral branch. Free and transparent elections had been held.  The revolutionary Government submitted itself to the scrutiny of universal suffrage in the 1990s. Electoral law was at the constitutional level, supervised by an independent supreme regulatory body.  Elections were held at the national, municipal and regional levels.  The supreme electoral body has recently adopted a new regulation for international electoral observers, based on principles of sovereignty and non-interference. 65. The Office of the Procurator for the defence of human rights had been established according to the Paris Principles and was totally independent of State institutions and the Government.  It was currently operating in an appropriate way. A number of special prosecutors had been established for vulnerable groups. 66. Regarding the prosecution of human rights defenders, Nicaragua was concerned that, as a result of a media campaign against the Government, inaccurate information had been disseminated.  There was no policy of prosecuting human rights defenders. Nicaragua was actively working to protect the work of human rights defenders. In Nicaragua, there were approximately 5,200 registered non-governmental organizations working to defend human rights, and tensions may be attributed to divergent points of views sustained by the organizations supporting government policies and those opposing them. Incidents had been investigated by the internal police investigative unit and prosecutors. 67. Belgium commended the ratification of the second Optional Protocol to International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. The situation of human rights defenders was cause for concern, since violence, threats and intimidation, sometimes even by public authorities, were frequent and remained unpunished. It asked about measures to allow human rights defenders carry out their activities freely and peacefully. Belgium was concerned about the criminalization of all forms of abortion, even when justified for therapeutic reasons, in cases of rape or incest. It made recommendations. 68. Finland thanked the efforts to keep up with the reporting requirements of treaty bodies. While appreciating the actions to improve gender equality, Finland noted that the norms and practices did not comply fully with international human rights treaties. It regretted that the electoral law for autonomous regions excluded the population of the Zelaya Central province. Finland asked how Nicaragua guaranteed the right of the people of Zelaya Central to choose their representatives freely in the autonomous government, and about measures to enforce women’s rights. Finland made recommendations. 69. Azerbaijan welcomed Nicaragua’s ratification of a number of international human rights instruments, its open invitation to special procedures, and the establishment of a national human rights institution in accordance with the Paris principles. It asked Nicaragua to provide information on meeting the Millennium Development Goals and measures to combat human trafficking. It made recommendations. 70. Israel noted the reforms, particularly the human development plan, to guarantee the promotion and protection of human rights, as well as the efforts madeto reduce poverty, malnutrition and illiteracy. Israel was concerned that human rights violations remained prevalent, including harsh and overcrowded prison conditions; disrespect for the rule of law; widespread corruption; the erosion of freedom of expression or opinion, press, assembly and association; violence against women and children; domestic and sexual violence; and discrimination against ethnic minorities and indigenous communities. It made recommendations. 71. Sweden asked about the measures to prevent maternal and infant mortality as a result of illegal and unsafe abortions. Sweden referred to reports on the discrimination of indigenous people in areas such as education, health services, election participation and land rights. Sweden made recommendations. 72. The Netherlands was pleased that Nicaragua was party to the majority of core human rights conventions and had issued a standing invitation to special procedures. It also noted the efforts made in the fields of economic, social and cultural rights by providing health and education accessible to all. It made recommendations. 73. Nepal appreciated the efforts to take development and human rights together. It highlighted the establishment of national institutions and legislative measures on human rights. It noted with satisfaction the efforts to reform the criminal judicial system and that Nicaragua was party to major human rights instruments. It commended Nicaragua for reducing poverty, improving education and public health, and broadening the enjoyment of economic, social and cultural rights. It highlighted the progress made in health-related Millennium Development Goals. It encouraged Nicaragua to continue building national institutions, increasing awareness about human rights and broadening the enjoyment of economic, social and cultural rights. 74. Spain congratulated Nicaragua on the ratification of the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. It asked about the increase in domestic violence and the high rate of feminicide, and requested recent data on the number of convictions in cases of domestic and sexual violence regarding complaints. It made recommendations. 75. Colombia highlighted efforts to strengthen institutions and the justice system, and the achievements made in implementing the accusatorial criminal system. It acknowledged efforts in the implementation of the national mine-clearing programme. Colombia noted improvements in combating maternal and child mortality in line with the Millennium Development Goals. It commended the steps taken to combat all forms of discrimination by decriminalizing same-sex relations. It made recommendations. 76. France noted with alarm the many reported cases of judicial harassment, physical intimidation and death threats of human rights defenders. It asked about measures to ensure their protection and to allow them to carry out their activities. It noted that Nicaragua forbade abortion in general, including therapeutic abortion. It asked about the consequences of the across-the-board prohibition for public health and its potential impact on maternal mortality rates. It noted cases of excessive use of force, ill- treatment, torture by the forces of law and order, particularly against detainees. It asked about measures to make the definition of torture in the penal code comply with the Convention against Torture and make the military criminal code criminalize torture. It made recommendations. 77. Belarus noted that the framework for human rights protection had been established and the human development plan had been approved.  Despite limited resources, Nicaragua sought to ensure the rights to food, education and health, and the protection of women’s and children’s rights. Belarus made recommendations. 78. Thailand appreciated the efforts and commitment to human rights. It welcomed the fact that Nicaragua was party to most core international human rights treaties and that the Constitution guaranteed human rights. It welcomed human rights education and training for public employees and the army, as well as the establishment of the office of the procurator for the defence of human rights. It noted the progress made in health and the rights of vulnerable groups. It commended Nicaragua for free education and its literacy campaign, which had drastically reduced illiteracy, and efforts to guarantee the right to food. Thailand appreciated Nicaragua’s focus on poverty reduction, development and democracy. It made recommendations. 79. Chile noted the laws on citizen participation, protection of refugees, equality of rights and opportunities, sovereignty and food and nutritional security, as well as the ratification of optional protocols to the Convention against Torture and the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. It commended the decision to forbid corporal punishment and humiliating treatment in schools. It welcomed the literacy campaign, which had reduced the illiteracy rate from 20 per cent in 2005 to 5 per cent in 2009. It made recommendations. 80. Bangladesh noted that Nicaragua was party to almost all core universal human rights treaties and its policies for the realization of human rights, particularly economic, social and cultural rights. It appreciated the initiatives to achieve coverage of social services and the progress in attaining universal literacy. Bangladesh noted Nicaragua was a developing country, with a huge population living in poverty and facing frequent natural disasters. Bangladesh made recommendations. 81. The Czech Republic welcomed the fact that Nicaragua was party to most core international human rights treaties. Regarding the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture, it asked about the functioning of the national preventive mechanism. It noted the large number of cases of harassment and intimidation of human rights defenders. It made recommendations. 82. Ireland welcomed the invitation to special procedures but was concerned by the high number of cases of death threats, physical intimidation and legal harassment of human rights defenders. It welcomed the efforts to fight violence against women, especially the national plan for prevention of domestic and sexual violence, noting however its frequent occurrence. It regretted the lack of access for these victims to the judicial process, as well as for the right to alimony and property. It expressed concern for the judges’ appointment procedure, the impartiality of sentences and lack of resources for judges. It made recommendations. 83. Malaysia commended the consultations with relevant stakeholders in the review process. It noted Nicaragua’s commitment to justice and respect for human rights, enshrined in the Constitution and legislation. Malaysia asked about the scope and content of the Children and Young Persons Code and the zero usury programme. Malaysia made recommendations. 84. Italy observed that Nicaragua faced a significant increase in cases of violence against women and killings of women, which frequently remain unpunished. It mentioned cases of harassment of human rights defenders and non-governmental organization activists, which might include physical harassment and defamation. It made recommendations. 85. The United States of America referred to civil society’s concerns about the denial of access to information and the lack of resources for the Office for Coordination of Access to Information. It noted with concern media complaints regarding harassment, censorship, arbitrary application of libel laws and the use of national security justification to suppress reporting. It appreciated the support expressed by Nicaragua for the participation of civil society and integration of the perspectives of women in promotion and protection of civil rights. It noted civil society leaders had been subject of unsubstantiated accusations, death threats and harassment. It made recommendations. 86. The Dominican Republic commended the importance given to the role and rights of women in development promising their full participation in national policy and decision-making. It recognized Nicaragua’s commitment to human rights, highlighting its programmes against poverty. It also recognized cooperation with different mechanisms and special procedures of the Council. It made recommendations. 87. India noted the accession to most major human rights instruments. It praised the human development plan, which set forth a development strategy based on the civil power model and citizen participation. It welcomed the introduction of special procurators and the establishment of the Office of the Procurator for the Defence of Human Rights in full accordance with the Paris Principles, and the Public Information Access Act. It highlighted the human rights training of police and military personnel, and steps to enhance access to justice, especially for vulnerable population. India appreciated efforts to provide universal coverage of social services, and commended for reducing illiteracy. It noted the Autonomous Regional Education System recognized the right of indigenous peoples to education in their own language. India commended the reduced maternal mortality but was concerned that the abortion law might contribute to maternal mortality. It asked about the possibility of providing exceptions in cases of therapeutic abortion. It also asked about challenges faced in implementing the new Criminal Procedure Code, especially regarding human trafficking. 88. Germany highlighted non-governmental organization reports on attacks and open or covert intimidation against human right defenders, journalists and radio stations, and on the vandalizing of independent media outlets. It asked about the steps planned to stop these attacks and to protect freedom of opinion and expression. It made recommendations. 89. Nicaragua was committed to providing information on the issues that have not been covered through the Permanent Representation.  The review process had allowed Nicaragua to establish a sincere, genuine and transparent dialogue with the Council. Nicaragua hoped to take on board as many recommendations as possible reflecting the realities of the country.  There was much to do, but Nicaragua expressed its will and commitment to respect human rights.  Nicaragua invited representatives of civil society organizations to join in this task and contribute with their inputs. II. Conclusions and/or recommendations 90. The recommendations formulated during the interactive dialogue and listed below enjoy the support of Nicaragua: 1. Continue efforts to ensure that national laws comply with its international human rights obligations (Thailand); 2. Continue following up on obligations entered into in the various human rights treaties, prioritizing the needs of the most vulnerable segments of the population (Bolivia (Plurinational State of)); 3. Apply constitutional provisions completely regarding the respect and protection of the rights of all citizens collectively and individually, the rights related to association, peaceful assembly, participation in equality of conditions in public affairs, in State management, and the right to make petitions, and to denounce irregularities and make constructive criticism (Chile); 4. Continue taking the steps necessary to ensure the signing of the national agreement on criminal justice (Colombia);  5. Take specific measures to ensure the full implementation of legislation on violence against women and of the national plan of action for the prevention of domestic violence and sexual violence (Canada); 6. Implement legislation on violence against women and girls and strengthen its legal and institutional support for victims of violence, including by full investigation, bringing to prosecution where appropriate all female murders, and ensuring that all victims of sexual violence have the right to justice and police protection (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland); 7. Review the compliance of national legislation with its obligations from the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW), and strengthen anti-discrimination legislation and programmes through explicit inclusion of grounds of sexual orientation and gender identity (Czech Republic); 8. Strengthen the independence and impartiality of the Ombudsman and ensure its full adherence to the Paris Principles (United Kingdom); Take measures to increase the capacity and independence of the Ombudsman (Ireland); 9. Strengthen its national human rights institutions by providing them with adequate resources (Netherlands); 10. Ensure that the allegations are cleared up, and take concrete measures in this regard such as the creation of a national observatory on human rights defenders, and carry out educational and training programmes on human rights for all levels of public administration (Spain); 11. Continue implementation of national priorities and measures aimed at settling issues related to the promotion and protection of human rights in accordance with its legislation and international obligations (Uzbekistan); 12. Continue to promote programmes related to the strengthening of respect for human rights (Dominican Republic), to ensure that the enjoyment of human rights is a reality for all people, without any discrimination (Bolivia (Purinational State of)); 13. Continue developing national policies with a gender perspective to guarantee the rights of women (Dominican Republic); 14. Continue efforts to promote and protect the rights of persons with disabilities, consistent with its obligations under the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (Thailand); 15. Implement fully the national human development plan for 2009-2011 (Russian Federation) and continue to give priority to national policies in it (Dominican Republic) 16. Continue measures to fight drug trafficking and terrorism (Viet Nam); 17. Continue efforts to promote human rights training and education for the police and army (Syrian Arab Republic); 18. Continue cooperating with the special procedures of the Human Rights Council, in accordance with its voluntary commitment to keeping the invitation to these procedures open (Dominican Republic); 19. Continue to strengthen efforts to promote and protect the rights of women, especially to eliminate discrimination and violence against women in all spheres (Thailand); 20. Consider providing sanctions against organizations that promote racial discrimination, and characterizing as criminal any act that promotes and incites racial discrimination (Egypt); 21. Take appropriate measures to combat racial prejudice in both the public and private media channels (Egypt); 22. Establish quick and effective measures to prevent, punish and eliminate violence against women taking into account the recommendations of the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and the Human Rights Committee on effective access to justice for the victims of gender violence, police protection and the establishment of shelters for victims (Mexico); 23. Take the measures necessary to combat violence against women effectively, increase women’s participation in all fields and bring national legislation into line with CEDAW (Azerbaijan); 24. Strengthen measures to prevent cases of domestic violence and the killing of women, and ensure that perpetrators be taken to justice (Italy); 25. Establish a specific policy and plan of action to eradicate sexual violence against women and girls (Germany); 26. Continue efforts to strengthen combating trafficking in women and girls and making trafficking in and sexual exploitation of women and children a criminal offence (Islamic Republic of Iran); 27. Initiate investigations, prosecute actively and punish adequately offenders involved in the trafficking and exploitation of women and children; implement fully national legislation on violence against women; and undertake immediate measures to establish shelters and implement effective police protection for victims as recommended by the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women, the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and the Committee against Torture (Israel); 28. Prohibit explicitly corporal punishment of girls and boys in all circumstances, as recommended by the Committee on the Rights of the Child (Chile); 29. Comply with the letter and spirit of the representations in its national report and ensure that civil society groups are able to operate without harassment or other forms of intimidation (United States of America); 30. Ensure that violence, threats and intimidations against human rights defenders are properly investigated and prosecuted (Belgium); 31. Strengthen independent procedures for prison inspection, reduce over.crowding in places of detention, separate minors from adults in prisons and detentions facilities, and bring the juvenile justice system into line with internationally recognized standards (Israel); 32. Uphold the rights to freedom of expression, assembly and association and allow restrictions only when prescribed by law and in line with international human rights standards (Germany); 33. Guarantee the transparency of the democratic processes and the full respect of its norms, such as, inter alia, the freedom of expression or opinion and the freedom of assembly and association (Israel); 34. Ensure full compliance with its law on access to information, and that the Office for Coordination of Access to Information be sufficiently staffed and equipped to undertake its responsibilities (United States of America); 35. Take further steps to ensure the transparent and politically impartial functioning of the Supreme Electoral Council and the accreditation of electoral observation, including by the national organizations IPADE and Etica y Transparencia (United Kingdom); 36. Reinforce its political and judiciary institutions to promote human rights and all other basic rights of the population (Lao People’s Democratic Republic); 37. Ensure full respect for the rule of law, including for the provisions set out in the Constitution for its amendment (Canada); 38. Continue to strengthen the rule of law as well as its national institutions aimed at further promoting and protecting human rights in accordance with the will and aspirations of the people of Nicaragua (Sri Lanka); 39. Ensure victim-sensitive and effective investigation and prosecution of perpetrators (Czech Republic); 40. Provide obligatory human rights education and training to police, prison and judiciary staff, and ensure their strict accountability for any violations of human rights (Czech Republic); 41. Allow effective access to justice for the victims of gender violence, giving them judicial protection and establishing shelters for victims, in accordance with recommendations of the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and the Human Rights Committee (Chile); 42. Consider the possibility of alternatives to prison sentencing, especially for boys, girls and adolescents (Mexico); 43. Continue Governments’ efforts to combat poverty (Syrian Arab Republic); 44. Strengthen further ongoing efforts and steps aimed at reducing poverty and ensuring economic and social rights, particularly the right to food, for its people (Viet Nam); 45. Continue to put in place effective strategies aimed at reducing poverty and addressing the problem of malnutrition (Azerbaijan); 46. Continue its policy of social protection for its residents in view of its national programme on ensuring food security, the fight against illiteracy, and the promotion of economic opportunities for its citizens (Belarus); 47. Continue to emphasize the promotion and protection of human rights in areas such as poverty eradication, justice administration, education, public health and gender equality for all, including for those on the Caribbean coast (Malaysia); 48. Combat poverty and achieve food security with the support and cooperation of the international community (Bangladesh); 49. Continue programmes to fight poverty and to bring about the realization of economic, social and cultural rights, favouring especially the most vulnerable categories of society, women and children living in regions exposed to natural catastrophes, and continue the “zero hunger” programme (Algeria); 50. Continue efforts to implement the “zero hunger” programme to combat poverty and achieve food and nutritional security, which assigns priority to poor rural families and marginal urban populations (Egypt); 51. Continue efforts to expand the coverage of and access to health services (Colombia); 52. Strengthen health-care services, with particular attention to women’s and children’s health (Bangladesh); 53. Maintain its outstanding efforts in providing health and educational services free to all its citizens (Cuba); 54. Welcoming the recognition of access to safe drinking water as an inalienable right of all human beings, continue efforts with regard to monitoring and accountability, guaranteeing the minimum standards of availability, quality and accessibility (Spain);  55. Take appropriate and effective measures to improve the welfare of children, including in the fields of health care, adequate living conditions and the right to education (Slovenia); 56. Provide rehabilitation services, nutrition, adequate housing, attention to health and educational opportunities for children living on the street in conformity with recommendations of the Committee on the Rights of the Child (Chile); 57. Make more efforts and mobilize plans and programmes to assist farmers in rural areas, ensure equity in land distribution, and increase funding and resources for farmers to improve agricultural productivity (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya); 58. Develop a national strategy for education in human rights within the school system, in accordance with the World Programme and Plan of Action, with the full participation of all (Italy); 59. Continue strengthening its successful education policy with a view to achieving full inclusion in schooling for all sectors of the country as the only way to advance towards development with a human face thus achieving real social welfare of the people, for which Nicaragua has the full support of the Venezuelan Revolutionary process (Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)); 60. Continue progress in education, with special attention to the education of girls (Bangladesh); 61. While taking into account the achievements of literacy campaign, allocate more resources to education in the national budget and ensure equal access to all levels of education, in particular for the most vulnerable groups (Islamic Republic of Iran); 62. Continue its programme for equal access to education for women and rural populations (Algeria); 63. Make efforts to guarantee the right to education of children with disabilities, to ensure their integration in society (Qatar); 64. Ensure the full participation of indigenous, communities of African descent and women in all levels of public affairs (Israel); 65. Ensure that indigenous persons fully enjoy all human rights, including the rights to education, adequate access to health services and land rights (Sweden); 66. Step up capacity-building efforts aimed at achieving the implementation of its human rights obligations (Malaysia); 67. That the international community redouble cooperation with Nicaragua and eliminate any political conditioning of aid (Cuba); 68. Continue to cooperate with the United Nations and other international organizations to strengthen human rights in Nicaragua (Lao People’s Democratic Republic); 91. Nicaragua considers that the recommendations listed above are either already implemented or in the process of implementation. 92. The following recommendations will be examined by Nicaragua, which will provide responses in due time. The response of Nicaragua to these recommendations will be included in the outcome report adopted by the Human Rights Council at its 14th session: 1. Continue accession to international human rights instruments (Belarus), including signing (Spain) and ratifying the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (Belarus, Finland, Spain); 2. Encourage Nicaragua to sign and ratify the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance (Spain); 3. Ratify the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court (Chile); 4. Consider ratifying as soon as possible (Norway)/ratify Convention No. 169 of the International Labour Organization (Chile); 5. Adopt urgent reforms of the Penal Code and other relevant legislation to restore the rights of women, girls, and adolescent victims of rape and other forms of violence against them, to receive protection, legal assistance and health care, including access to legal and safe therapeutic abortion, and their full rehabilitation and reinsertion (Slovenia); 6. Include in the Criminal Code and Military Penal Code the definition of torture established in the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (CAT) (Mexico); 7. Amend the civil and military penal codes to bring them into line with CAT, to which Nicaragua is party, and bring to justice those responsible for acts of torture (France); 8. Eliminate the crime of defamation from the criminal code in order that these facts are examined under the civil code (Mexico); 9. Create the national council of women for the follow-up of the implementation of the Equal Rights and Opportunities Act (Finland); 10. Adopt appropriate measures to disseminate widely and ensure full observance of the Declaration on Human Rights Defenders (Norway); 11. Encourage Nicaragua to recognize publicly the work of human rights defenders and continue its efforts to guarantee basic civil and political rights (Spain); 12. Strengthen measures aimed at the prevention of unwanted pregnancies, including by increasing knowledge and awareness of family planning (Sweden); 13. Strengthen measures to prevent violence against women, in particular by raising awareness of the fact that discrimination and violence against women are unacceptable (Czech Republic); 14. Intensify efforts in its fight against violence against women and amend laws that may be obstacles to this fight (Ireland); 15. Implement the recommendations of United Nations treaty bodies with regard to the repeal of prohibition of all forms of abortion, and consider the introduction of legislation that ensures the rights of women and girls in situations where their life is endangered as a result of pregnancy and in which termination of the pregnancy could save their life (Netherlands); 16. Consider the abolition of the criminalization of therapeutic abortion in accordance with the recommendations made by various treaty bodies (Norway); 17. Revise the ban on abortions to allow exceptions in cases of pregnancy resulting from rape, incest or therapeutic abortion (Czech Republic); 18. Follow through on recommendations of different treaty bodies regarding the possibility of considering exceptions to the general prohibition of abortion, especially in cases of therapeutic abortion and pregnancies resulting from rape and incest (Mexico); 19. Improve the protection of women and children by ensuring that protection services are enhanced and enshrined in law, that victims are provided with more information on access to such support and medical care, and that legislation regarding women’s health and therapeutic abortion are revised (United Kingdom); 20. Revise its legislation on abortion with a view to authorizing it at least in cases where pregnancy is the result of rape and/or an incestuous relationship, or where the fact of carrying the pregnancy to term puts the life or health of the woman in danger (Belgium); 21. Amend legislation on abortion in order to take into account situations where pregnancy is the result of sexual aggression or incest or when the pregnant woman is in danger, and guarantee the access of all women to sexual and reproductive health (France); 22. Revise legislation regarding the sexual and reproductive rights of women, including the abolition of the total ban on abortion, and ensure their access to services necessary for their enjoyment of the highest attainable standard of health (Finland); 23. Consider reviewing laws regarding abortion, removing punitive provisions against women who have had an abortion and medical professionals who have exercised their professional responsibilities (Sweden); 24. Revise legislation to allow abortion in cases of pregnancy resulting from rape or incest and in cases where continuation of the pregnancy would put the health or life of the woman or girl at risk (Germany);  25. Take measures to ensure the protection of human rights defenders and journalists against harassment, physical attacks and death threats, including by investigating such incidents fully and bringing those responsible to justice (Canada); 26. Guarantee that cases of persecution and threats against human rights defenders are properly investigated and prosecuted, and if need be compensate victims (Ireland); 27. Take all measures necessary to guarantee that cases of harassment and threats against human rights defenders and non-governmental organization activists are investigated and prosecuted appropriately, and that reparation is guaranteed for the victims (Italy); 28. Take decisive measures to ensure the prevention of cases of harassment and intimidation of human rights defenders, including through a high-level public campaign in support of the positive role of civil society, and specifically denouncing these attacks and through independent investigation and prosecution of perpetrators (Czech Republic); 29. Investigate and prosecute effectively violations against human rights defenders and journalists, and that the Government forcefully denounce these attacks against human rights defenders, and that the State authorities give human rights defenders legitimacy and recognition through supportive statements (Norway); 30. Take all measures necessary for the protection of human rights defenders and the free exercise of their activities, and prosecute those responsible for acts of harassment or violence against them (France); 31. Ensure the full respect of the constitutional provisions on freedom of expression, and refrain from using administrative, judicial, or financial means to limit the exercise of this human right (United States of America); 32. Ensure that civil society organizations may express their opinions freely on Government policy (Netherlands); 33. Implement fully the law on access to information, establish an independent body to regulate broadcasting and take effective measures to protect journalists and investigate all reported incidents of intimidation aimed at silencing journalists (Netherlands); 34. Take measures to ensure that members of the political opposition are able to express their views freely, and are protected against intimidation and violence, including during peaceful demonstrations (Canada); 35. Revise the electoral law for autonomous regions in order to involve all citizens in decision-making and the development of their autonomous regions (Finland); 36. Institute appropriate reforms to ensure the full independence of the judiciary (Canada); Strengthen the independence of the judiciary further (Azerbaijan); 37. Ensure that the judiciary is independent and free of political interference, and combat corruption, irregularities and delays in the administration of justice (Israel); 38. Pay more attention to the problems related to the independence of the judicial process, and ensure that all judicial procedures are in harmony with the international standards associated with a democratic State (Ireland); 39. Reinforce the impartiality of the judiciary promoting an appointment system by competitive examinations at all levels of the judiciary (Spain); 40. In relation to violence against women, provide victims with full access to the judicial system, compensation and health services (Czech Republic); 41. Examine the possibility of taking interim measures to facilitate access to justice in favour of women and to give them the necessary judicial assistance (Algeria); 42. Increase budget allocation to the education sector (Azerbaijan); 93. All conclusions and/or recommendations contained in the present report reflect the position of the submitting State(s) and/or the State under review. They should not be construed as endorsed by the Working Group as a whole. Annex Composition of the delegation The delegation of Nicaragua was headed by H.E., Ms. Ana Isabel Morales Mazun, Minsitra de Gobernacion, and composed of 6 members: • Carlos Robelo Raffone, Representante Permanente de la República de Nicaragua con rango de Embajador ante la Organización Mundial del Comercio (OMC), con sede en Ginebra, Suiza; • Néstor Abraham Cruz Toruño, Representante Permanente Alterno de la República de Nicaragua ante la Oficina de las Naciones Unidas y Otros Organismos Internacionales con sede en Ginebra, Suiza; • Rosa María Lovo Hernández, Ministerio de Relaciones Exteriores; • María Elsa Frixione Ocón, Procaduría General de la República; and  • Zorayda Blandón Gadea, Procaduría para la Defensa de los Derechos Humanos. 