Distr.: General 24 March 2011 Original: English General Assembly Human Rights Council Seventeenth session Agenda item 6 Universal Periodic Review Report of the Working Group on the UniversalPeriodic Review* Oman * The annex to the present report is circulated as received. Contents Paragraphs Page Introduction............................................................................................................. 1–4 3 
I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process................................................ 5–88 3 
A. Presentation by the State under review........................................................... 5–20 3 
B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review........................ 21–88 5 
II. Conclusions and/or recommendations..................................................................... 89– 92 13  Annex Composition of the delegation ......................................................................................................... 24 Introduction 1. The Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review, established in accordance with Human Rights Council resolution 5/1 of 18 June 2007, held its tenth session from 24 January to 4 February 2011. The review of Oman was held at the fifth meeting on 26 January 2011. The delegation of Oman was headed by the Minister Responsible for Foreign Affairs, Yusef bin Alawi bin Abdulla. At its ninth meeting held on 28 January 2011, the Working Group adopted the report on Oman. 2. On 21 June 2010, the Human Rights Council selected the following group of rapporteurs (troika) to facilitate the review of Oman: Burkina Faso, Jordan and Spain. 3. In accordance with paragraph 15 of the annex to resolution 5/1, the following documents were issued for the review of Oman: (a) A national report submitted and a written presentation made in accordance with paragraph 15 (a) (A/HRC/WG.6/10/OMN/1); (b) A compilation prepared by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) in accordance with paragraph 15 (b) (A/HRC/WG.6/10/OMN/2); (c) A summary prepared by OHCHR in accordance with paragraph 15 (c) (A/HRC/WG.6/10/OMN/3).  4. A list of questions prepared in advance by Canada, Denmark, France, Germany, Latvia, Netherlands, Norway, Slovenia, Sweden and the United Kingdom was transmitted to Oman through the troika. These questions are available on the UPR extranet. I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process A. Presentation by the State under review 5. Oman expressed its gratitude and appreciation to OHCHR, the members of the Working Group and the troika for the efficient work they had undertaken in preparing the review session.  6. Oman noted that it had accorded priority to human welfare ever since the country’s great renaissance in 1970 under the enlightened leadership of His Majesty Sultan Qaboos bin Said. 7. The Council of Ministers of Oman had set up a ministerial committee to oversee the drafting of the national report. The committee was expected to continue its work in the future, monitoring the outcome of the review and following up on it within the Sultanate’s human rights system. Oman reaffirmed at workshops held with civil society the importance of their involvement in the review process by submitting direct reports to OHCHR, providing input for the national report and, in the longer term, playing a role in monitoring the review’s recommendations at the national level.  8. The Oman Basic Law promulgated in 1996 laid down the basic principles and criteria of human dignity and freedom, equal rights and equality of opportunity for all without discrimination. 9. The preparation of the report for the review coincided with the celebrations for the fortieth anniversary of modern Oman. This occasion was a motivating factor to work hard to produce an objective account of achievements in terms of legislation, institutions and policies aimed at guaranteeing a high living standard, human dignity and freedom. It had also motivated the Sultanate to identify areas in which a greater effort was required to fully achieve its aspirations and ambitions. 10. In the past four decades, Oman had been laying solid foundations for a modern State based on citizenship, institution-building, the rule of law, justice and equality, as well as the cultural and civilizational values of Omani society.  11. Oman had ratified the Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC) and its two Optional Protocols; the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination; the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW); and the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD). Oman was working to prepare its reports to the relevant treaty bodies. 12. Oman intended to consider signing additional treaties and review some of its reservations to articles of the treaties it has ratified. Oman announced that it had decided to withdraw four of its reservations to CRC and to limit the scope of its fifth and final reservation. Oman expressed its appreciation to the expertise of the different United Nations treaty bodies for their recommendations and the Special Rapporteur on the human rights aspects of the victims of trafficking in persons, especially women and children.  13. The legislative and institutional developments provided evidence of the fact that Oman had succeeded, in a relatively brief period of time, in establishing the requisite legal structure at the national level to embed human rights principles in its national legislation and its institutions.  14. Oman provided quantitative indicators of the advances made in the last four decades in the areas of education, health services, average life expectancy and average infant mortality. These achievements had resulted in being ranked as the first country in the world in terms of the pace of progress achieved in the areas of health and education, according to the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) 2010 Human Development Report. 15. The Omani Government had taken major steps, at the very highest level, to encourage women to pursue educational opportunities, join both public and private sector employment and become involved in all social and economic fields. Omani women occupied ministerial positions in the Government and senior management posts in business firms, serving in some cases as chief executive officer. With a view to supporting and consolidating these advances, 17 October of each year had been declared Omani Women’s Day. 16. His Majesty the Sultan, in his address on the occasion of the opening of the second session of the Consultative Council (Majlis el-Shura) in 1994, had called on “Omani women everywhere, in villages and towns, in urban areas and in the countryside, on the plains and in the mountains, to rally their forces and contribute to economic and social development, each according to her individual abilities, potential, expertise, skills and position in society”, adding that “the homeland needed all citizens to join forces in the onward march towards progress, growth, stability and prosperity”, and that women played a vital role in society. 17. Oman had updated its legislation and adopted numerous measures aimed at protecting the rights of the various components of the labour force. The Ministry of Labour, in coordination with representatives of the private sector and the trade unions, was keen to take advantage, on an ongoing basis, of the expertise of the International Labour Organization (ILO) so that it could take additional steps to update legal provisions and to implement best practices in order to safeguard the rights of employers and employees. 18. Oman had enacted the Law on Combating Human Trafficking and set up a national committee to prepare reports, draw up national plans, make recommendations and take the necessary steps to counteract the growing global phenomenon of human trafficking and address certain undesirable practices in both sending and receiving countries concerning the exploitation of workers for the purposes of human trafficking. 19. Oman had established the National Human Rights Commission to perform oversight and assessment tasks and monitor the human rights situation on the ground. Oman had already made a commitment to ensure that it was functioning is in accordance with the principles relating to the status of national institutions for the promotion and protection of human rights (Paris Principles). 20. Oman had taken major steps forward and made extraordinary progress over the past 40 years by promoting awareness, enacting laws and building institutions aimed at achieving the best possible outcome. The goal of consolidating the national human rights system constituted an ongoing task for Oman. B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review 21. During the interactive dialogue, 51 delegations made statements. A number of delegations thanked Oman for its constructive participation, openness and willingness to cooperate in the universal periodic review process and acknowledged Omani efforts in the promotion and protection of human rights. Active dialogue with civil society during the preparation of the national report was positively noted. Additional statements which could not be delivered during the interactive dialogue owing to time constraints have been posted on the Extranet of the universal periodic review where available.1 Recommendations made during the dialogue can be found in chapter II of the present report. 22. Qatar noted that over the past few decades Oman had succeeded in establishing a well-developed legal system for the protection of human rights, and that the main provisions in this regard were contained in the Basic Law. Oman had also created an institutional framework, including the National Human Rights Commission. The right to development, and particularly human development, were at the centre of national policies. This had enabled Oman to realize social and economic rights, in particular for women and children, and in the areas of health and education. 23. Saudi Arabia highlighted major developments which had taken place in Oman over the past few decades and had led to a better protection and promotion of human rights, both at the legal and the institutional level. Saudi Arabia particularly commended achievements in the area of education and in spreading a human rights culture in the different segments of Omani society.  24. The United Arab Emirates commended the integration of fundamental human rights principles in the Omani Constitution and legislation, in line with international instruments. It also appreciated the achievements in the economic, social and cultural fields, noting that, according to UNDP, Oman ranked among the top ten countries internationally with regard to the pace of progress in education and health in the past few decades. The United Arab Emirates also commented on the importance placed by Oman on combating human trafficking. 25. Bahrain noted that Oman had adopted a number of policies to promote human rights, in particular the right to education and women’s rights, and commended that education was provided free of charge for all citizens.  Awareness-raising on human rights was part of the general education and the work of the media. Bahrain also highlighted the importance given 1 Afghanistan, Djibouti, Republic of Korea, Latvia, Nicaragua, Palestine, Somalia. to the advancement of women, citing examples of high-level posts occupied by women in Government and legislative bodies. 26. Algeria commended the attention devoted by Oman to the problem of human trafficking and the right to development. It also highlighted achievements in the areas of health and education and with regard to the rights of women, children and migrant workers. Algeria also noted the role of Oman at the international level in taking initiatives related to road safety and the fighting of disease. Algeria further drew attention to the voluntary pledges into which Oman had entered in its report. 27. Kuwait highlighted achievements in the promotion and protection of human rights over the past 40 years, in particular the right to development, including human development.  During that period, schools had been built throughout the country, literacy programmes had been implemented and Oman University had been established. Kuwait further drew attention to the establishment of the National Human Rights Commission, which worked to promote and protect human rights. 28. Turkey welcomed the promulgation of the Basic Law and the establishment of the National Human Rights Commission. It appreciated efforts to prevent misconduct against expatriate workers and protect their rights. It noted efforts to provide equal opportunities and develop an open society, and the launching of an electronic voting system facilitating universal suffrage for the Consultative (Majlis el-Shura) elections next October.  29. Morocco noted that Oman had a comprehensive legal framework strengthened by accession to the major international human rights instruments and that it had made strong efforts in consolidating cooperation with the international institutions. It also highlighted the role of civil society in the development process, and the attention paid to the rights of women and their participation in public life, as well as the tolerant approach in interacting with a large number of migrant workers from different countries and cultures. 30. Egypt highlighted the priority given by Oman to building an effective institutional framework comprising the National Human Rights Commission and the National Committee for Combating Human Trafficking. Egypt commended Omani efforts in fighting human trafficking and assisting victims.  It appreciated efforts undertaken to protect the rights of women and children as well as persons with disabilities. It welcomed the accession by Oman to a number of human rights instruments, such as CRC and its optional protocols, and the fact that Oman was studying the possibility of acceding to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR). 31. Iraq noted that Oman had acceded to a number of international human rights instruments, and that their principles and provisions were reflected in Omani legislation, including with regard to the separation of powers, the rule of law, the independence of the judiciary, and respect for fundamental rights and freedoms. Iraq also highlighted efforts to fight human trafficking as well as the fact that Oman had acceded to the Arab Charter on Human Rights. Iraq appreciated Omani achievements in the health sector and in the area of child rights, and its ratification of CRPD. 32. Azerbaijan welcomed measures taken to prevent human trafficking and assist victims. It noted that the recent Human Development Report had placed Oman among the world’s 10 leading countries regarding progress made over the past decades in education, health and other public sectors. It commended steps encouraging women to participate fully and equally in all spheres of life, amendments to the Law on Passports, the protection of women in labour relations and the establishment of consultative centres for women. It welcomed the establishment of the National Committee concerned with follow-up and implementation of CRC.  33. Mauritania noted that Oman had taken major steps with regard to the promotion and protection of human rights and expressed its appreciation for Omani achievements and its continuing efforts in that regard. Mauritania was confident that Oman would continue on that path, with due regard to the values and customs which suited Omani society. 34. India acknowledged progress regarding women and children, and in the areas of health and education. It noted the significant reduction of infant and under-5 mortality rates and the increase in elected representation in Government. Efforts made to establish a legal infrastructure included the National Human Rights Commission and the National Committee for Combating Human Trafficking. While noting measures in favour of domestic servants and temporary workers, India encouraged Oman to consider bringing them within the scope of the Labour Law, thereby ensuring their basic rights.  35. The Islamic Republic of Iran noted the establishment of the National Human Rights Commission, the National Committee for Combating Human Trafficking and the National Committee for following up the implementation of CRC. It noted the outstanding progress of Oman in health, employment, welfare and education sectors. The Islamic Republic of Iran further noted effective measures for the promotion and protection of the persons with disabilities including the consultative centres for women, families and marriage guidance.  36. Canada noted the establishment of the National Committee for Combating Human Trafficking and legislation regarding the rights of domestic migrant workers, and the care provided for persons with disabilities. It noted several challenges, including legislation limiting freedom of expression, particularly the Internet and the press, prevalence of discrimination and the lack of mechanisms of protection against domestic violence and forced marriage. The judiciary, though independent, remained subordinate to the executive and subject to its influence.  37. Sri Lanka highlighted progress in relation to women and children and in the fields of health and education. It noted that the Civil Service Law of 2004 guaranteed equal rights and duties for public sector employees without gender discrimination for both citizens and non-citizens. It welcomed the new Labour Law, which defined terms and conditions for expatriate workers in the private sector, and encouraged Oman to bring domestic workers under this law. It welcomed the signature by Oman of the memoranda of understanding with countries that supply labour and encouraged it to further strengthen implementation of this Ministerial Decision.  38. The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela highlighted that the World Health Organization had listed Oman among the leading countries of the world in providing comprehensive primary health care and in terms of the effectiveness of the whole health system financed by the Government of up to 80 per cent.  It also noted an increase in average life expectancy and a significant drop in the mortality rate. Concerning treatment of non-communicable diseases Oman guaranteed free health care from basic care through to tertiary health care, including rehabilitation and social inclusion. 39. Oman responded to questions and enquiries of Member States made during the interactive dialogue, noting that its legislation guaranteed the rights of all, in accordance with the Basic Law, and provided equality for all citizens before the law, while prohibiting discrimination between them. Omani legislation did not allow violence against women, guaranteed respect for women’s dignity and forbade behaviour which was not acceptable in Omani society, noting that such acts of violence were punishable under the Criminal Code and that appropriate remedies existed in the courts. Sexual harassment was also punishable under the appropriate provisions of the Criminal Code. 40. It was also noted that there was no discrimination with regard to political participation of women, who had the right to nominate themselves to be elected to the Consultative Council (Majlis el-Shura). Women participated in political life as members of the Cabinet and the State Office. 41. Oman stressed that it had been a State party to CRC since 1996 and to the two optional protocols since 2004. Oman had established a committee to oversee the implementation of the Convention and its optional protocol, and was drafting a law on the rights of children that would guarantee the protection of all rights of children and the provision of services thereto, including children born out of wedlock.  42. Oman noted that it had collected data on cases of disabilities, through the population censuses of 2003 and 2010. The 2008 Law on the Rights of the Disabled provided many rights, including the right to employment at a minimum quota of 1 per cent in the government administrative sector and 2 per cent in the private sector in enterprises with a number of employees exceeding 50 persons. Oman had 33 non-governmental centres working on a voluntary base and supported by the Government in order to provide the daily services to those with disabilities. Oman hoped to establish more centres of that type. 43. Under the Basic Law, school education was free of charge for all children living in Oman. This had also contributed to enrolment rates of over 90 per cent in primary schools, over 80 per cent at the preparatory level and almost 80 per cent in secondary schools.  44. Oman noted that it paid special attention to the education of children with disabilities and that there were three specialized schools, for the visually impaired, the deaf and the mute. Specialized teachers helped these children to attain better integration in the community. A national plan for the integration of children with disabilities in the public schools had been adopted in early 2000.  45. The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea underlined the achievements of Oman in areas such as education and health. As recognized by UNDP, Oman was one of the world’s leading countries regarding progress made in education and health in recent decades. It noted that constant efforts were being made in the area of women’s empowerment, as demonstrated by increased numbers of women in major public posts. 46. France noted with satisfaction measures taken to promote human rights, particularly the establishment of the National Human Rights Commission. Acknowledging significant efforts to improve women’s status, France noted continued gender inequality regarding the ability to pass on citizenship, and the vulnerability of women and children to domestic violence. It also noted restrictions of the freedom of association and the freedom of expression, referring to censorship of newspapers and publications deemed politically or culturally offensive.  47. Spain acknowledged efforts made and urged Oman to continue consolidating the legal framework for the protection and promotion of human rights. It congratulated Oman on its determination to reach the second millennium development goal regarding the right to free education for all citizens and reduce the level of illiteracy in the country.  48. Jordan noted that Oman had made considerable progress in the area of economic, social and cultural rights for instance, in particular in the areas of health and education. Jordan also appreciated progress in the area of civil and political rights, including with regard to the freedom of expression and opinion and related developments in the legislative framework concerning the media. 49. Slovenia noted the progress of Oman in the areas of juvenile justice, forced labour, human rights education and human trafficking, and the fast decline in under-5 mortality. While commending the number of voluntary pledges, it noted a number of challenges in the area of civil and political rights, including discrimination and violence against women, and regarding the rights of children and migrant workers. 50. Yemen expressed it’s appreciation for the progress made by Oman in a relatively short period in the human rights area. It noted that Oman had built the necessary legal framework to implement human rights principles at the national level, especially with regard to the rights of women and children. Yemen welcomed that Oman had made such progress based on the preservation of the specificities and social values of Oman, while benefiting from the experience and best practices of others.  51. Indonesia noted increased efforts to make human rights awareness a core part of the national education system. It noted that human trafficking was becoming a significant challenge for the Sultanate and commended Omani efforts to tackle this issue with the seriousness it deserved. Indonesia shared concerns voiced by various stakeholders that the National Human Rights Commission was not yet accredited by the International Coordinating Committee (ICC).   52. Lebanon noted that Oman had taken major steps towards the promotion of human rights with the creation of the National Human Rights Commission and the committee to combat human trafficking. In recent years, Oman had made concrete achievements in different areas related to economic, social and cultural rights. Lebanon particularly commended initiatives for the empowerment of Omani women and the promotion of their participation in the Consultative Council (Majlis el-Shura) and in the economic sphere.   53. Libyan Arab Jamahiriya commended the achievements regarding, inter alia, the rights to health and education, the right to work, and the freedom of opinion and expression. The Libyan Arab Jamahiriya also appreciated the efforts made by the National Human Rights Commission in raising awareness concerning human rights in all regions of the country. It further welcomed the lifting of reservations to CRC.  54. Malaysia commended Oman for major strides particularly in the area of legislative reform and socio-economic development, including increased investment in education, health, training and social services, and for its proactive stance in advancing the rights of women and children. It welcomed the intention of Oman to withdraw its reservations to CRC and noted its seriousness in addressing the scourge of human trafficking and issues related to migrant workers.   55. Singapore commended Oman for its support for the rights of women, children of ethnic minorities and the disabled. It also noted that the high ranking of Oman in the 2010 Human Development Report as a testament to the great strides that the nation had made in social development and economic progress, leading to significant improvement in healthcare and education. It noted that fighting terrorism was one of the main challenges today and that Oman had made tremendous achievements in this respect.  56. Bangladesh noted Oman’s economic growth and efforts in the area of governance and free education and health care. It further noted measures to reduce gender disparity, including in educational levels, as well as the increased life expectancy. Bangladesh welcomed the existence of an administrative court, a functioning human rights institution and guarantees for the enjoyment of religious rights. It noted that the National Committee for Combating Human Trafficking provided safeguards against trafficking and forced labour. It commended efforts regarding the welfare of expatriate workers and the constitutional recognition of the family as basis of society.  57. The United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland was pleased to note the confirmation concerning the lifting of reservations to CRC. It welcomed the work in combating discrimination against women, including the designation of an official Omani Women’s day, and Oman’s ratification of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. The United Kingdom was concerned that some aspects of the domestic law still allowed for discrimination against women and migrant workers. It encouraged Oman to address concerns by the Committee of the Rights of the Child during the preparation of the new Draft Law of the Child. The United Kingdom strongly encouraged Oman to sign both CAT and its Optional Protocol.  58. Oman noted that freedom of expression and opinion were guaranteed for all. The press and other media were devoted to the development of the country as a whole.  This is why Oman had been ranked nineteenth in the world according to the global report on information development for 2009–2010. The number of newspapers, magazines and periodicals had increased to over 80. The private sector had started creating private radio and television stations. There was also a continuing increase in the number of Internet sites that offer services in full freedom and transparency. Oman asserted that no person was imprisoned for expressing an opinion as long as certain principles and rules were respected. Oman continually worked on aligning its legislation with ratified instruments. 59. On the question regarding granting citizenship to children as a way to prevent statelessness, the law provided that Omani citizenship is granted to the child of an Omani women if the father is with unknown citizenship, but that the child takes the citizenship of the father, whether he is Omani or not, if the father is of a known citizenship.   60. Chad noted with satisfaction the importance Oman accorded to the review, which allowed States, at regular intervals, to analyse their progress made in the protection of human rights owing to the comments and recommendations of other States.   61. Brazil welcomed the improvements in life expectancy, mortality and literacy rates. It commended Oman for its substantial voluntary pledges, including with regard to accession to international instruments and the withdrawal of reservations. It noted that the situation faced by migrant workers was still of concern. The sponsorship system made them vulnerable to abuse and mistreatment, including trafficking. Domestic workers were particularly vulnerable. The situation of women still required improvements, particularly in the rules on marriage, divorce and child custody. Children born out of wedlock still faced serious vulnerabilities. 62. The Philippines acknowledged the legal infrastructure of Oman and its progress in the area of health development, including comprehensive primary health-care services. It welcomed efforts to increase women’s involvement and participation in public life, and noted the inclusion of human rights concepts in primary school curricula. It commended the drop in infant mortality rates, the prohibition of child labour and the establishment of a national committee concerned with following-up the implementation of CRC. It welcomed measures adopted to safeguard the rights of domestic workers and to address human trafficking. 63. Pakistan was pleased to note that the 2010 Human Development Report listed Oman among the countries that had made the greatest progress in recent decades in education, health and other sectors. It also noted progress in empowering women in the educational and economic spheres. Their participation in all fields needed to be encouraged. It also noted that the rapid pace of economic development had attracted a large number of foreign workers and that a number of legal and administrative measures had been taken to improve their living and working conditions. 64. Sudan noted achievements in the area of child rights and the judicial system, and rapid progress towards comprehensive development in all areas, including health, education and living standards. Within the framework of its development efforts, Oman had also addressed poverty and unemployment. 65. The Syrian Arab Republic appreciated the sincerity of Oman in promoting human rights, including the right to development, and reinforcing the national human rights framework. The Syrian Arab Republic also highlighted the values of peace, tolerance and justice in the collective culture of the Omani people, noting that Oman accorded the highest priority and respect to human dignity. These values and principles provided a solid basis for the promotion and protection of human rights. The Syrian Arab Republic noted that Oman had acceded to a large number of human rights instruments and that it pursued constructive cooperation with different human rights mechanisms. 66. Sweden welcomed the ratification by Oman of CEDAW, but noted that women continued facing discrimination in law and practice, regarding their personal status and employment and their subordination to male guardians. It noted the existence of the death penalty. Concerning the freedom of expression, Sweden expressed concerns at arbitrary arrests and restrictions by law and practice. Noting that homosexuality was illegal and punished according to sharia law, it inquired how LGBT rights could be safeguarded. 67. Slovakia commended, inter alia, legislative measures strengthening the legal protection for children, the bill for the care and rehabilitation of persons with disabilities, and the Law on Combating Human Trafficking. Slovakia was concerned that the Press and Publication Law allowed the censoring of publications. It was particularly concerned about reports of harassment of journalists and writers for criticizing Government policies in recent years. It noted that women continued to face inequality in areas such as marriage, divorce, inheritance, child custody and employment.    68. Uzbekistan underlined the Omani constitutional human rights protection and the special attention it attached to the rights to health, education and work. Uzbekistan welcomed in particular the establishment of the National Human Rights Commission as an independent institution fostering cooperation with civil society. Noting efforts to combat human trafficking, it inquired about results of implementing the Law on Combating Human Trafficking and the work of the National Committee for Combating Human Trafficking. 69. Chile highlighted Omani efforts in human rights and urged the Government to continue to consolidate the legal framework for the effective promotion and protection of human rights. It congratulated Oman on its determination to reach the second millennium development goal concerning free education, and to reduce the illiteracy rate.  70. The United States of America commended the progress of Oman in the areas of education, public health and workers’ rights, particularly the increase of schools and elementary school enrolment rates. Increased spending on health services and awareness campaigns had led to greater life expectancy and reduced infant mortality rates. It noted that migrant workers could join unions, and that women were protected from dismissal for reasons of sickness, pregnancy or childbirth. It remained concerned that Omani women married to non-nationals could not pass their citizenship to their children, and at the prevalence of human trafficking. It also noted inequalities with regard to the work conditions of non-Omani workers, especially the lack of a legal minimum wage and work hour limits.   71. Oman noted that, during a very short period of time, it had established legal structures for the protection of workers rights in conformity with international standards. Oman had adopted the new Labour Law in 2003, providing equal rights for all workers. 72. Oman commented on the protection of domestic workers, and noted that regulations to combat trafficking in persons required recruitment agencies to comply with all regulations of the countries of origin of workers, to maintain a registry with information on the workers brought to Oman and to conclude a model contract with the employer to protect the workers and their rights. 73. The Labour Law did not make a distinction between Omani and migrant workers. Oman respected the rights of workers, including those temporarily employed. Oman had committed itself voluntarily to review a number of labour-related laws, taking account of ILO Conventions Nos. 87 and 98, as a prelude to adopting the necessary measures. Oman had also established a hotline to receive complaints from workers whose rights were infringed, so that necessary action could be taken. 74. Oman further noted that it attached great importance to combating all crimes, including trafficking in persons as a contemporary form of slavery, committed by the exploiting persons belonging to vulnerable groups, particularly children, youths and girls. An amendment had been introduced to the Labour Law in order to bring it in conformity with the Law on Combating Human Trafficking. 75. Oman focused on raising general awareness about trafficking in persons, with a focus on victims. In that regard, the National Committee for Combating Human Trafficking in persons had produced about two million leaflets in seven different languages that were distributed to all target groups, in addition to posting on websites and dissemination through other media. Oman highlighted its efforts in monitoring trafficking activities and prosecuting perpetrators of trafficking in persons. 76. Oman had an integrated network of information based on international, regional and national cooperation and coordination, with an exchange of information with the International Criminal Police Organization (INTERPOL), and the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and other relevant agencies. The Omani strategy to combat trafficking in persons also focused on the rehabilitation and reintegration of victims. Oman was committed to combating trafficking in persons by reinforcing existing measures and working on raising awareness and encouraging victims to report any actions that could fall under the Law on Combating Human trafficking. 77. Cuba noted significant progress in education, health, fighting trafficking and rights of persons with disabilities. It highlighted universal access to quality education, progress in the health system, advances regarding the rights of women and children, and that Oman was prepared to strengthen participation of women in the workforce and economic fields. It welcomed efforts aimed at the enrolment of girls in specialized courses and professional training. Significant progress had been made with regard to migrant workers. 78. Norway acknowledged the efforts and results of Oman in improving the human rights situation. It noted that active participation of civil society was essential to a meaningful universal periodic review process, and that despite freedom of speech by law, freedom of expression remained curtailed in practice.  79. Italy appreciated the measures for advancing equality of women and expressed its confidence that de facto discrimination, especially in relation to marriage, divorce, inheritance and child custody, would be corrected in the future. Italy noted that no executions had been carried out in Oman since 2001. It noted that the amended 2009 Press and Publication Law further tightened existing restrictions and extended criminal liability to persons operating communication facilities. 80. Argentina noted the progress which Oman had made in reducing child mortality of children below the age of 5, which had been particularly highlighted by the World Health Organization. 81. Nigeria encouraged Oman to continue implementing programmes and policies initiated to fully guarantee the rights of its citizens. It observed that Oman was party to a number of core international human rights instruments, and encouraged it to consider signing or acceding to international human rights instruments such as the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families (ICRMW).  82. Poland noted that freedom of expression remained limited in Oman. It expressed concerns over the Press and Publication Law which allowed the censoring of publications perceived as politically, culturally or sexually offensive. It inquired about measures to stop harassment of journalists and writers for criticizing Government policies or public services. 83. Nepal highlighted the significant progress by Oman in different fields concerning economic, social and cultural rights, particularly in relation to women and children, and in the fields of health and education. It noted that Oman occupied a dignified rank in the global human development index. It highlighted efforts towards establishing the National Human Rights Commission and the National Committee for Combating Human Trafficking. 84. Germany commended Oman for the establishment of the National Human Rights Commission and sought its views regarding a future ICC accreditation. It noted that while the Labour Code affirmed the equality of all workers, this applied to citizens only. Germany enquired about Omani plans to grant civil rights to non-citizens, particularly expatriate workers.  85. Australia welcomed progress particularly in economic, social and cultural rights. It was nonetheless concerned that inequality between men and women was enshrined in Omani law. It appreciated the initiative to raise the minimum working age from 13 to 15 years old, as part of efforts to end child labour. Australia was concerned that access to education was restricted to girls. It was also concerned by new measures further restricting freedom of opinion and expression. Australia remained concerned that capital punishment was a part of Omani law.  86. China appreciated the establishment by Oman of a national legal infrastructure and the incorporation of human rights principles in its law and institutions. It noted the promulgation of the law on combating human trafficking and the establishment of a related national committee. China commended the Omani progress in education and public health as noted by UNDP and its active role in the global initiative on road safety. It hoped the international community would respect Oman for its traditions and customs as an Islamic country. 87. In closing remarks, Oman noted that it was considering the possibility of acceding to ICCPR and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR). Oman would be regularly reviewing the conventions it had already acceded to in order to consider the removal of reservations made to them. Oman confirmed its decision to withdraw four of its reservations to CRC and to limit the scope of its fifth and final reservation. Oman was going to train more people at the national level and increase capacity building in order to prepare for the accession to additional international human rights treaties. 88. Oman indicated that it would ensure coordination in the follow-up to UPR among all human rights stakeholders, including the national human rights institution and civil society, to evaluate the outcome of the review and to develop national plans and relevant human rights legislations. II. Conclusions and/or recommendations 89. The recommendations formulated during the interactive dialogue and listed below have been examined by Oman and enjoy the support of Oman: 89.1. In the context of continuing its consideration concerning its accession to international treaties, accord priority to accession to the two fundamental international human rights conventions (Algeria); 89.2. Consider ratification of basic international instruments (Turkey); 89.3. Consider the possibility of acceding to some of the international conventions to which the Sultanate of Oman is not yet a party, with due regard to its religious and cultural specificities and the needs of Omani society (Morocco); 89.4. Continue to adopt a positive perspective towards accession to ICCPR (Egypt); 89.5. Maintain its positive approach to studying the question of accession to ICESCR (Syrian Arab Republic); 89.6. Continue with the process of harmonizing national laws, regulations and legislations with the provisions of the international human rights treaties to which it is a party and take appropriate measures in this regard (Qatar); 89.7. Take further measures aimed at strengthening laws and regulations regarding human rights (Mauritania); 89.8. That domestic legislation be brought more closely into line with the stipulations of relevant human rights instruments and that the Government establish an effective coordination and oversight body to monitor anti-trafficking efforts and collect accurate data for use in future strategies and initiatives (Indonesia); 89.9. Continue promulgating legislation and promoting policies necessary to strengthen the protection of, and respect for, the rights of women and their role in society, while considering them an essential partner in the development process (Egypt); 89.10. Continue its efforts to ensure bringing into force of the Omani Law of the Child in pursuit of its national strategy on children and in line with the obligations under CRC (Bangladesh); 89.11. Further pursue efforts to pass a national law which would ensure a greater degree of protection for children (Sudan); 89.12. Finalize and enact legislation to better protect children, including the draft Law of the Child (Australia);  89.13. Place importance on the review of the Law on Civil Associations to ensure a more effective working environment for them (Lebanon); 89.14. Continue to work to strengthen national human rights mechanisms (Nepal); 89.15. Continue efforts to enhance the capacities of institutions working with persons with disabilities, including educational and health institutions (Saudi Arabia); 89.16. Consider creation of additional national mechanisms to promote and protect human rights of vulnerable groups especially women, children and people with disabilities (Islamic Republic of Iran); 89.17. Sustain its constructive steps taken in the field of human rights (Turkey); 89.18. Continues with its efforts to promote and protect human rights and freedoms (Sri Lanka); 89.19. Continue its efforts in the protection and promotion of human rights (Chad);  89.20. Further pursue cooperation with civil society organizations with a view to promoting and protecting human rights in different areas, including the areas of education, health, migrant workers and gender equality (Morocco); 89.21. Increase efforts aimed at the realization of further progress in the process of strengthening economic, social and cultural rights, including in particular the rights of women and children and persons with disabilities (Egypt); 89.22. Further continue its efforts to improve the rights of children, ensure that the Omani Law of the Child is enforced and consider developing a comprehensive national plan of action for children (Azerbaijan); 89.23. Devise a practical national strategy to spread a human rights culture so as to guarantee the protection of these rights in the long term (Mauritania); 89.24. Adopt a national action plan for child rights in the juvenile justice system (Sudan); 89.25. Submit the overdue reports in connection with the implementation of the International Convention on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination (Morocco); 89.26. Make further efforts to respond to communications and questionnaires submitted by the Special Procedures mandate holders (Jordan); 89.27. That the National Human Rights Commission find a mechanism for cooperation with OHCHR, especially with regard to programmes and courses relating to human rights (Kuwait); 89.28. That the Sultanate of Oman strengthen its cooperation with the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights with a view to holding more training sessions for awareness raising and education on human rights (Kuwait);  89.29. Continue its efforts to overcome discrimination based on gender, race, descent and nationality (Argentina); 89.30. Continue putting forward effective measures in order to eliminate discrimination against women (Azerbaijan); 89.31. Take additional measures to eliminate all forms of discrimination against women and promote the status of women and their participation in all State institutions (Bahrain); 89.32. Strengthen existing efforts to increase the opportunities for the representation of women in the Omani Consultative Council (Majlis el-Shura) (Bahrain); 89.33. Take further efforts to promote the participation of women in public life (Algeria); 89.34. Promote the rights of women and enable them to participate more effectively in public life (Morocco); 89.35. Consider further steps to engage women in politics in order to increase the number of women in decision-making positions (Norway); 89.36. Increase opportunities for the representation of women in Government functions (Yemen);  89.37. Continue its aspirations to bring women into the mainstream of its national aspirations (Bangladesh); 89.38. Continue its efforts to develop capacities of women to fulfil their responsibilities as key partner in the development (Pakistan); 89.39. Intensify efforts and measures to ensure the effective promotion of women rights protection, in line with the special customs and values of the Omani society (Mauritania); 89.40. Conduct an awareness and information campaign aimed at confronting the customs and traditions that give rise to discriminatory practices and violence against women, particularly within the family (Canada); 89.41. Further adopt policies and legislation to combat discrimination and violence against women, particularly domestic and sexual violence (Brazil); 89.42. Ensure equal rights between women and men with regard to personal status, employment and education (Italy); 89.43. Strengthen the National Committee on Persons with Disabilities, fully ensuring its operations through the development of its norms and provision of adequate financial resources; adopt a national strategy to eliminate de facto discrimination against persons with disabilities based on an appropriate statistics system (Spain); 89.44. Take concrete steps to strengthen protection of women, ensuring that complaints of domestic violence are properly registered and investigated by the police, and that perpetrators are prosecuted and convicted (Norway); 89.45. Launch an awareness-raising campaign regarding the elimination of violence against women (Jordan); 89.46. Continue its efforts to end the practice of female genital mutilation in line with recommendations by the Committee on the Rights of the Child (Slovenia); 89.47. Continue efforts to put an end to the practice of female genital mutilation (Italy); 89.48. Share its experience in fighting human trafficking with other States and continue its efforts to fight this social ill in cooperation with the international community (United Arab Emirates); 89.49. Continue its efforts to effectively combat human trafficking, also through raising public awareness (Azerbaijan); 89.50. Strengthen its efforts to prevent and combat human trafficking offences through studying international best practices, developing domestic legislation in conformity with international standards, establishing institutions and agencies and strengthening cooperation with relevant international organizations and bodies (Islamic Republic of Iran); 89.51. Increase law enforcement against trafficking for forced labour and take steps to systematically identify and protect victims of trafficking (United States of America); 89.52. Continue its efforts to combat and eradicate trafficking in persons in accordance with international standards (Argentina);  89.53. Take steps to set up a special section in courts and tribunals to look into issues of human trafficking (Singapore); 89.54. Strengthen human rights training of public sector employees (Syrian Arab Republic); 89.55. Continue its role in promoting dialogue between different religions and civilizations, based on the principle of peaceful coexistence and a culture of moderation and tolerance (Saudi Arabia);  89.56. Enhance freedom of expression, association and assembly (Brazil);  89.57. Adopt safeguards to ensure freedom of expression (Poland);  89.58. Take measures to guarantee and protect freedom of expression in conformity with international standards (France) 89.59. Review its relevant legal framework to safeguard the legitimate exercise of freedom of expression (Slovakia); 89.60. Continue cooperation programmes with ILO with a view to further developing the National Programme for Decent Work (Algeria); 89.61. Continue the work aimed at the prohibition of child labour (Jordan);  89.62. Continue to strengthen the participation of women in the workplace and in the economic sphere, as well as its care for workers from other countries (Cuba); 89.63. Enhance cooperation and assistance mechanisms to provide the required services regarding migrant workers during their presence in the Sultanate (Morocco); 89.64. Continue its efforts in addressing the welfare of expatriate labours (Bangladesh); 89.65. Continue to engage constructively with partners and with the international community to safeguard the human rights of migrant workers, particularly to life, liberty, security of person and just and favourable conditions of work (Philippines); 89.66. Continue improving living and working conditions of foreign workers (Pakistan); 89.67. Continue pursuing efficient, appropriate policies to provide for a better protection of migrant workers, this most vulnerable workforce (Slovakia); 89.68. Extend work standard regulations – especially those regarding health and safety – to all resident workers, regardless of citizenship (United States of America);  89.69. Continue efforts in protecting the dignity and interests of migrant workers, including through appropriate institutional and legislative measures (Nepal); 89.70. Further pursue efforts aimed at promoting the protection of the rights of migrant workers and share its pioneering experience in international forums (Iraq); 89.71. Exchange information with other countries with regard to best practice in protection of foreign workers (Germany);  89.72. Continue to undertake measures that promote the rights of children, including the provision of equal access to services and protection for children of migrant workers (Philippines); 89.73. Further pursue its efforts aimed at promoting economic growth and raising living standards in the Sultanate (Qatar); 89.74. Further pursue its efforts and programmes to promote human development in rural areas (Qatar); 89.75. Put in place plans aimed at strengthening human development programmes in the Sultanate of Oman (Qatar); 89.76. Strengthen development efforts with a focus on the rural areas (Algeria); 89.77. Accelerate development programmes, especially in the rural areas in all regions of the country (Iraq); 89.78. Step up effort in ensuring that the development programmes and other measures taken to improve the quality of lives of the people fully benefit the vulnerable groups, including those living in the rural areas (Malaysia); 89.79. Continue to strengthen programmes aimed at extending the framework of economic and social right to all citizens, and to improve living standards for those with limited income (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya); 89.80. Continue its successful social policy in the field of health, providing the necessary resources to ensure maintaining the large institutional capacity currently exhibited by its comprehensive health system (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela); 89.81. Adopt measures highlighting the importance of its comprehensive development in all areas, including education, health and living standards, amongst others (Sudan); 89.82. Maintain its efforts in the fields of health and education (Cuba); 89.83. Strengthen education and health systems, fight illiteracy and raise awareness on human rights issues (Saudi Arabia); 89.84. Take further initiatives to address the phenomena of poverty and unemployment (Sudan); 89.85. Continue efforts to ensure decent housing for all citizens (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya); 89.86. Continue efforts to ensure the enrolment of all segments of society in education (Yemen); 89.87. Remove all restrictions on girls’ access to education (Australia); 89.88. Continue in its efforts to integrate human rights within school curricula (Singapore); 89.89. Continue its efforts to integrate human rights education in the remaining grades in schools (Democratic People’s Republic of Korea); 89.90. Increase efforts to integrate a human rights culture into school curricula at all stages of education (Bahrain); 89.91. Improve continuously the implementation of its programmes for human rights education (Philippines);  89.92. That the Sultanate of Oman further pursue the practical measures which it has taken to spread a human rights culture in educational institutions, and use the media for this purpose (Kuwait);  89.93. Intensify programmes and activities and provide training and education on human rights issues to military and police officers (Saudi Arabia); 89.94. Share best practices in promoting the education of children with disabilities (Qatar); 89.95. Share with other States its expertise and achievements in the management of institutions providing special needs education (Saudi Arabia); 89.96. Continue efforts to provide educational facilities to persons with special needs (Lebanon); 89.97. Continue efforts to fight terrorism and adopt further programmes and activities to protect society from the phenomenon of terrorism, and fight extremism, which has come to pose a threat to many countries and an obstacle to their development (Iraq); 89.98. Organize training sessions and workshops on human rights for the competent authorities to combat terrorism while respecting the rule of law (Singapore); 89.99. Fulfil the voluntary pledge to establish a follow-up committee to study all recommendations submitted during the current universal periodic review process (Syrian Arab Republic); 89.100. Establish an effective and inclusive process to follow up on UPR recommendations (Norway); 89.101. Seek close cooperation with the national human rights institution and local NGOs in the implementation of recommendations addressed to Oman in the course of this UPR and which will enjoy the support of the Government (Germany); 89.102. Continue the open and constructive dialogue with members of civil society, in particular during the follow-up to the UPR recommendations (Egypt); 89.103. Strengthen cooperation with the international community and organizations including the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), OHCHR and ILO with a view to building capacity and getting technical advice and assistance on matters related to addressing trafficking in persons (Malaysia); 90. The following recommendations will be examined by Oman which will provide its responses in due time, but no later than the seventeenth session of the Human Rights Council in June 2011. These responses will be included in the outcome report adopted by the Human Rights Council at its seventeenth session in June 2011. 90.1. Sign and ratify ICCPR (United Kingdom); 90.2. Continue to consider acceding to ICESCR (China); 90.3. Continue to consider entering into ICESCR and ICCPR (Democratic People’s Republic of Korea); 90.4. Consider acceding to ICCPR and ICESCR (Jordan); 90.5. Accede to ICESCR and ICCPR (Chad); 90.6. Continue to assess the possibility of acceding to ICESCR and ICCPR (Chile); 90.7. Sign, ratify and implement in national law ICESCR, ICCPR and their Optional Protocols (Italy); 90.8. Accede to ICCPR and ICESCR as well as the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance (CED) (France); 90.9. Accede to ICCPR, ICESCR and ILO Conventions Nos. 87 and 98 (Slovenia); 90.10. Become a party to ILO conventions (Chad);  90.11. Accede to CAT, the Optional Protocol thereto and the Optional Protocol to CRPD (Slovenia); 90.12. Sign and ratify ICCPR, ICESCR, CAT and their Optional Protocols as well as the Optional Protocols to CEDAW, CPRD and CED (Spain); 90.13. Ratify ICCPR and its two Optional Protocols, ICESCR and its Optional Protocols, CAT, the Optional Protocol to CEDAW, the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court, the Convention relating to the Status of Refugees and its Protocol, the Convention relating to the Status of Stateless Persons, and the Convention on the Reduction of Statelessness (Slovakia); 90.14. Examine the possibility of becoming party to the following international instruments: ICESCR, ICCPR, CAT, CED, ICRMW (Argentina); 90.15. Continue to take concrete steps to improve the rights of women and children, including through ratification of the Optional Protocol to CEDAW and addressing the concerns of the Committee on the Rights of the Child (United Kingdom); 90.16. Consider accession to the remaining core international human rights instruments and withdrawing existing reservations to CEDAW and CRC (Brazil);  90.17. Withdraw the general reservation to CEDAW and those foreseen in relation to articles 9, 15 and 16 (Italy); 90.18. Consider putting in place all necessary machineries to resolving and withdrawing from all outstanding reservations on human rights treaties for the full enjoyment of human rights by its people (Nigeria); 90.19. Review and amend national legislation to ensure compliance with the rights to freedom of opinion and expression enshrined in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (Canada); 90.20. Strengthen the national human rights institution, and adapt it fully to the Paris Principles, with a broad and clear mandate, and adequate funding (Spain); 90.21. Support the National Human Rights Commission, in order to bring it in line with the Paris Principles (Indonesia); 90.22. Consider establishing an independent national human rights institution accredited by ICC and in conformity with the Paris Principles (Malaysia);  90.23. Continue efforts to bring the National Human Rights Commission in line with the Paris Principles (Chile); 90.24. Establish a national human rights institution in line with Paris Principles (Nigeria);  90.25. That the national human rights institution cooperate with other institutions from the region and seek accreditation according to the Paris Principles by ICC (Germany); 90.26. Disseminate better and ensure full observation of the Declaration on Human Rights Defenders (Norway); 90.27. Extend an open and standing invitation to all special procedures (Spain); 90.28. Extend a standing invitation to the United Nations human rights special procedures (United Kingdom); 90.29. Consider issuing a standing invitation to all special procedures mandate holders (Brazil); 90.30. Take effective measures to eradicate discrimination against women and expediently ensure the equal treatment of women in law and practice, in accordance with its international obligations under CEDAW (Sweden); 90.31. Conduct a review of the Personal Status Law and the Labour Law with a view to repealing articles that discriminate against women (Canada); 90.32. Consider reviewing its Personal Status Law, Labour Law as well as any other related laws with a view to eliminate discrimination against women (Slovakia); 90.33. Take measures towards the full equality for Omani women including by reviewing the Personal Status Law and Labour Law (Australia); 90.34. Amend its Nationality Law to enable women the legal right to transmit Omani citizenship to their children (United States of America); 90.35. Intensify gender efforts, amending relevant legal provisions which establish subordination to male guardianship and adopt a comprehensive gender policy and awareness campaigns aimed at all areas of society and public administration (Spain); 90.36. Put in place appropriate mechanisms to ensure effective protection of women exposed to domestic violence, sexual harassment, spousal rape, forced marriage, crimes in the name of honour and other forms of violence (Canada); 90.37. Continue its efforts to prevent acts of domestic violence, of which women and children are the principal victims, ensuring that these acts are penalized and that their perpetrators be prosecuted systematically (France); 90.38. Strengthen the efforts to prevent domestic violence, protect its victims and punish the perpetrators, including by removing articles 109 and 252 of the Penal Code (Slovenia); 90.39. Enact specific legislation that criminalizes domestic violence, and provide more information in all major languages to citizens and residents of Oman regarding domestic violence and means to combat it (United States of America);  90.40. Take the necessary steps to fully implement provisions of its Basic Law, which guarantees the independence of the judicial system, including by ensuring a complete separation between the executive and the public ministry (Canada); 90.41. Increase the minimum age of criminal responsibility contained in the Law of the Child in accordance with international human rights norms to ensure the protection of the rights of all children (Canada); 90.42. Implement and further strengthen the right to organize freely, bargain collectively and strike (Norway); 90.43. Revise the procedures governing registration of civil society organizations to ensure transparent, non-discriminatory, expeditious and inexpensive procedures that allow for appeal and are in conformity with international human rights standards (Norway); 90.44. Take all necessary steps to implement the laws protecting freedom of expression and press, and effectively prevent authorities from violating these rights (Sweden); 90.45. Take further steps to decriminalize acts of opinion and expression, including repealing articles in the penal code which allow for the imprisonment of journalists for their writing (Norway); 90.46. Amend the press provisions of the Penal Code to state explicitly that journalists should not be imprisoned or otherwise criminally punished solely for exercising their right to free expression (Norway); 90.47. Revise the Press and Publication Law with a view to removing criminal liability for activities that constitute the legitimate exercise of freedom of expression and to adopt safeguards for guaranteeing the exercise of this right (Italy); 90.48. Revise the Press and Publication Law with the view to removing criminal liability for activities that constitute the legitimate exercise of freedom of expression (Poland); 90.49. Review legislative measures restricting freedom of opinion and expression, including the Communications Law (Australia); 90.50. Ensure the enjoyment of the right to work and to just and favourable conditions of work to all migrant workers, especially domestic workers (Brazil); 90.51. Revoke the current sponsorship system, kafala, and replace it with regulations in accordance with international standards (Norway). 91. The following recommendations did not enjoy the support of Oman: 91.1. Take all necessary measures to abolish the death penalty, including by acceding to the Second Optional Protocol to ICCPR (Australia); 91.2. Deepen its efforts to eliminate discrimination against women and respect the rights of the child by reforming the Nationality Law to enable Omani mothers to transmit their nationality to their children, regardless of the nationality of their father (France); 91.3. Recognize the full and equal enjoyment of human rights by all and immediately abolish the law that criminalizes homosexuality (Sweden); 91.4. Take effective measures to combat discrimination on any grounds, including sexual orientation and identity (Sweden); 91.5. Establish a moratorium on the use of death penalty (United Kingdom); 91.6. Introduce a de facto and de jure moratorium on the death penalty, with a view to adopting a law abolishing the death penalty (Sweden); 91.7. Establish a moratorium in order to abolish the capital punishment, and change those sentences to imprisonment and ratify the Second Optional Protocol to ICCPR (Spain); 91.8. The adoption of a moratorium on the death penalty with a view to abolishing capital punishment in national legislation (Italy); 91.9. Consider establishing an official moratorium on the use of death penalty with a view to abolishing it (Slovenia); 91.10. Commute without delay all death sentences to terms of imprisonment and ratify the Second Optional Protocol to ICCPR (Sweden); 91.11. Guarantee the exercise of freedom of association and promote and facilitate the activities of all NGOs (France); 91.12. Amend the Law of Association to allow the associations to join international coalitions without the approval of the Ministry of Social Development (Poland). 92. All conclusions and/or recommendations contained in the present report reflect the position of the submitting State(s) and/or the State under review. They should not be construed as endorsed by the Working Group as a whole. Annex Composition of the delegation The delegation of Oman was headed by HE Mr. Yousuf bin Alawi bin Abdullah, Minister Responsible for Foreign Affairs, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, and composed of the following members: • HE Mr. Yahya bin Salim AL WAHAIBI , Ambassador, Permanent Representative, Permanent Mission of the Sultanate of Oman in Geneva • HE 	ambassador Naser bin Saif AL HOSNI, Deputy President of the Legal Department for International Conventions • 	Mr. Abdulghafar  AL BALUSHI, Counselor, Deputy President of the Department of Secretary General Office • Mr. Yousuf	 bin Abdullah AL AFIFI, Counselor, Director of Human Rights OfficeDepartment of International Affairs • Mr. Khaled bin Yaaqoub AL HARITHI,  	Counselor, Deputy President of the Political Affairs Offic,  Department of Minister's Office • Mr. Mohammed  	AL RAWAHI, Deputy Permanent Representative, Permanent Mission of the Sultanate of Oman in Geneva • Mr. Najib bin Yahya AL BALUSHI, First Secretary, Director of the Coordination and Follow-up, The Minister's Office • Mr. Abdullah bin Khalfan AL HARRASI, First Secretary, Permanent Mission of the Sultanate of Oman in Geneva • Mr. Ahmed bin Bakhit AL SHAHRI, First Secretary, Permanent Mission of the Sultanate of Oman in Geneva • Mrs. Amira bint Huwishel AL YAAQOUBI,  	Third Secretary, Permanent Mission of the Sultanate of Oman in Geneva • HE Sheikh Zaher bin Abdullah AL ABRI , Undersecretary of the Ministry of Justice • Mr. Hamoud bin Taleb AL BALUSHI, Judge in the Supreme Court, President of General Administration of Judicial Inspection • Mr. Badr bin Ahmed AL YAHYAEI, Director of the Undersecretary Office • Mr. Faysal bin Omar bin Said AL MARHOUN •	 HE Sayid Hamad bin Hilal AL BUSAIDI, Undersecretary of Ministry of Manpower • Dr. Ali bin Hasan AL ABDAWANI, Advisor to the Minister Manpower Planning • HE Sayid Mohammed bin Sultan AL BUSAIDI, Undersecretary of the Ministry of the Interior • 	Dr. Sheikh Shihab bin Ahmed bin Ali AL JABIRI, Advisor to Minister of the Interior for Legal Affairs, Supervisor of the Legal Department • Mr. Ahmed bin Khalfan bin Salem AL GHAFILI,  Senior Legal Research • HE Dr. Muna bint Salem AL JURDANIAH, Undersecretary of the Ministry of Education and Curriculum • 	Mr. Mohammed bin Abdullah bin Mohammed AL FARAEI, Director of the Office of Undersecretary of Education and Curriculum • HE Sheikh Abdullah bin Shwin AL HOSANI, Undersecretary of the Ministry of Information • Mr. Naser bin Hamid AL KHAYARI, Director	 of the Undersecretary Office, Ministry of Information • HE Sayid Salem bin Mosallem AL BUSAIDI, Undersecretary of the Ministry of Civil Service for Administrative Development Affairs • HE Dr. Yahya bin Naser AL KHASIBI, Undersecretary of the Ministry of Legal Affairs • Mr. Jamal bin Salem bin Saif AL NABAHANI, Counselor Assistant in Ministry of Legal Affairs • HE Dr. Yahya 	bin Badr AL MAOULI, Undersecretary of Ministry of Social Development • Mr. Yahya bin Mohammed AL HINAI, Director-General of Family Development •	 Dr. Yasmine bint Ahmed bin Jaafar, Director of Health of Family and Society • Colonel Dr. Abdullah bin Ali AL HARTHI, Member and Rapporteur of National Committee for Combating Human Trafficking • Mr. Mohammed bin Darwish AL SHIDI, Prosecutor Assistant • Mr. Said bin Mohammed AL MOQBALI, Senior Undersecretary of the Prosecutor • Hon. Mohammed bin Abdullah AL RIYAMI, Chairman of National Committee of Human Rights • Jihad bin Abdullah AL TAEI, Member of National Committee of Human Rights 