  United Nations  A/HRC/22/12    General Assembly  Distr.: General 26 December 2012  Original: English  Human Rights Council Twenty-second session Agenda item 6 Universal Periodic Review   Report of the Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review*  * The annex to the present report is circulated as received.   Pakistan Contents  Paragraphs Page   Introduction .............................................................................................................  1–4 3  I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process ................................................  5–121 3   A. Presentation by the State under review ...........................................................  5–24 3   B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review ........................  25–121 6  II. Conclusions and/or recommendations .....................................................................  122–124 14  Annex   Composition of the delegation .........................................................................................................  26 Introduction 1. The Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review (UPR), established in accordance with Human Rights Council resolution 5/1 of 18 June 2007, held its fourteenth session from 22 October to 5 November 2012. The review of Pakistan was held at the 11th meeting, on 30 October 2012. The delegation of Pakistan was headed by Hina Rabbani Khar, Minister for Foreign Affairs. At its 17th meeting, held on 2 November 2012, the Working Group adopted the report on Pakistan. 2. On 3 May 2012, the Human Rights Council selected the following group of rapporteurs (troika) to facilitate the review of Pakistan: Chile, China and Congo. 3. In accordance with paragraph 15 of the annex to resolution 5/1 and paragraph 5 of the annex to Council resolution 16/21, the following documents were issued for the review of Pakistan:  (a) A national report submitted/written presentation made in accordance with paragraph 15 (a) (A/HRC/WG.6/14/PAK/1);  (b) A compilation prepared by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) in accordance with paragraph 15 (b) (A/HRC/WG.6/14/PAK/2 and Corr.1);  (c) A summary prepared by OHCHR in accordance with paragraph 15 (c) (A/HRC/WG.6/14/PAK/3). 4. A list of questions prepared in advance by Czech Republic, Denmark, Germany, Ireland, Mexico, Norway, Netherlands, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland was transmitted to Pakistan through the troika. These questions are available on the extranet of the universal periodic review.  I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process  A. Presentation by the State under review 5. The Minister reminded the Working Group that Pakistan was a founding member of the Human Rights Council and during its prior tenure on the Human Rights Council, from 2006-2011, it played an active role in its work and a constructive role in building convergences between the West and the Islamic world on the most contentious and challenging issues in the Council. Pakistan welcomed the engagement with the international community through an open and constructive dialogue on its human rights record and took this review exercise as an important opportunity to share with the international community the efforts that it is making for the promotion and protection of human rights. 6. The Minister stated that the UPR had been a catalyst for Pakistan to bring positive changes in legislation, policy and practice. Following the completion of its first UPR, a process of consultation and dissemination of information was launched. Recommendations that were accepted in 2008 were shared with the relevant Government departments for follow-up. 7. The Minister underlined that Pakistan was a democratic, pluralistic and progressive State in the comity of nations. Pakistanis aspire to a society based on equality, the rule of law, respect for diversity, and justice. Pakistan’s Constitution reflected all these aspirations and Pakistan was committed to fulfilling these aspirations despite numerous challenges and setbacks faced in its 65-year history. Following restoration of democracy in 2008, Pakistan had taken a number of steps to restore the democratic nature of State institutions. 8. The Minister highlighted that Pakistan was a functional democracy with an elected and sovereign parliament, an independent judiciary, a free media and a vibrant and robust civil society. The media, besides aggressively monitoring Government policies, worked zealously to raise awareness among the people of their human rights and fundamental freedoms. Civil society played a key role in fostering a culture of accountability and transparency and assisted in changing societal attitudes. Similarly, an independent judiciary and legal community had taken wide-ranging steps to uphold the rule of law and ensure the protection of constitutional rights of all citizens. 9. The Minister stated that the human rights record of any country could not be assessed in a vacuum as one needs to study the situation on the ground in its proper context. The reporting period (2008 to 2012) had been one of the most challenging in recent. Pakistan continued to face enormous challenges on different fronts, ranging from security and terrorism to the economy, apart from natural calamities. 10. The Minister said that during the last four years, there had been transformational changes in Pakistan’s constitutional and legislative framework. Parliament had passed three constitutional amendments as part of an overarching compact between the country’s major political parties to engender long-term democratic values in the country, after the trauma of repeated military interventions. The right to education, the right to information and the right to a fair trial were now recognized as fundamental rights, which could not be suspended. The restored federal system empowered the provinces, and invested much more richly in the notion of the democratic significance of the State’s ability to engage with the grassroots. 11. The Minister highlighted that the years 2008 to 2012 had been the most active period of legislating on human rights in the history of Pakistan. A number of bills were passed by the Parliament to strengthen human rights in the country, including more than half a dozen laws for the promotion of women’s rights. In May 2012, Pakistan enacted a new law creating an independent National Commission for Human Rights in accordance with Paris Principles. Moreover, some long overdue changes were made to administrative governance in the Federally Administered Tribal Areas (FATA). Following amendments to the colonial-era Frontier Crimes Regulation (FCR) in 2011, the arbitrary powers of the local administration to make arrests and detain individuals were curtailed and prisoners given the right to bail. Furthermore, in 2011 the Political Parties Order 2002 was extended to FATA. 12. The Minister stated that, since the last review, Pakistan had ratified a number of international human rights instruments including the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), the Convention against Torture (CAT) and the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD). Pakistan had now ratified seven out of nine core international human rights treaties and was focused on implementing these instruments at the national level. An inter-ministerial process had been set up to coordinate implementation and to prepare reports for the treaty bodies. 13. The Minister stated that in the spirit of dialogue, Pakistan extended invitations to a number of special procedures of the Human Rights Council to visit Pakistan. The High Commissioner visited Pakistan in June 2012 at the invitation of the Government. The visit provided her an opportunity to observe first-hand the wide-ranging measures taken by Pakistan in promotion and protection of human rights. The Special Rapporteur on the independence of judges and lawyers visited Pakistan from 19 to 29 May 2012, while the Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances visited Pakistan from 10 to 20 September 2012. Pakistan has also extended an invitation to Special Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of the right to freedom of opinion and expression. 14. The Minister stressed that in the past 10 years; terrorism and extremism have endangered national security and the social fabric and violated the human rights of citizens. Pakistan has made extraordinary efforts and sacrifices to eradicate the scourge of terrorism and build a peaceful and stable region. No country and no people had suffered more in the epic struggle against terrorism than Pakistan. To date Pakistan had lost nearly 7,000 soldiers and policemen, and over 40,000 people in total. The total cost of this struggle to Pakistan’s economy over the last decade had been nearly US$ 70 billion. Despite these barbaric acts and gigantic losses, Pakistan’s commitment and resolve to combat the scourge of terrorism remained unwavering. 15. The Minister stressed that drone strikes and resulting civilian casualties were counter-productive, against international law and a violation of Pakistan’s sovereignty. She  urged the Council to discuss comprehensively the human rights challenges linked to the drone strikes. 16. The Minister said that Pakistan’s counter-terrorism response was in compliance with the obligations under international law. Counter-terrorism operations were conducted on specific intelligence with all precautions to avoid civilian causalities. Any complaints against law enforcement officials were taken seriously by their respective departments, Parliament and the courts. 17. The Minister stated that for centuries Pakistan hosted various religions whose followers had lived in peace and harmony. She said that the minorities were an integral part of Pakistani society and had played an important role in the development, peace and prosperity of the country. The Constitution guaranteed the rights of minorities to freely profess their religion and visit their places of worship. Extremists were targeting the vast majority of Muslims who were moderate and did not subscribe to their extremist agenda. In this connection, Pakistan had lost many bold voices advocating tolerance and respect. 18. The Minister stated that Pakistan attached importance to the promotion and protection of the right to freedom of opinion and expression. Following the restoration of democracy in 2008, all curbs against the media were lifted. Over 100 television channels and many more radio stations and newspapers regularly highlighted political, social and human rights issues and led the national debate on issues of public importance. 19. The Minister said that Pakistan hosted one of the world’s largest refugee populations, of over 3 million people, for more than 30 years. Despite drastic reduction in international assistance, Pakistan continued to host the refugees in the spirit of traditional hospitality. 20. The massive floods and rains of 2010 and 2011 caused dislocation of 2.6 million people. Extremist threats and the ensuing law-enforcement action in Swat and parts of FATA also resulted in dislocation of a section of the local population. The National Disaster Management Authority and the Provincial Disaster Management authorities  established to provide emergency assistance and relief during natural calamities have fully integrated human rights and gender-sensitive training in their activities. 21. The catastrophic floods affected around 20 million people and caused immense damage to infrastructure. Energy shortfall also increased exponentially in the last few years. These developments adversely impacted the economic strength of the country, its ability to finance projects in the social sector and had slowed Pakistan’s progress in achieving MDGs. 22. The Minister reported that, despite economic constraints, efforts have been made to improve social-economic conditions of the citizens. In the 18th Amendment to the Constitution of Pakistan, the subjects of health, education, housing, social welfare, women’s development, local government, and water and sanitation have been devolved to the provinces. Under the new formula, provinces will receive 57 per cent of federal resources. 23. In 2008, the Benazir Income Support Programme (BISP) was introduced to supplement the existing network and to provide immediate relief to low-income families enabling them to absorb the shock of rising prices of food and fuel. Since then, BISP had  evolved into the country’s main social safety net and benefitted more than 6 million families and provides health and life insurance, micro-credit and technical and vocational training. Women are its prime beneficiaries. 24. On women’s rights the Minister reported that the Government had taken a number of legal, institutional and administrative initiatives for the advancement of women. This series of legislation included the Prevention of Anti-Women Practices (Criminal Law Amendment) Act 2011, the Acid Control and Acid Crime Prevention Bill 2010, the Domestic Violence (Prevention and Protection) Bill and laws on sexual harassment. Political and economic empowerment of women was among the top priorities, with 33 per cent seats reserved for women in local government, 17 per cent in the National Assembly and Provincial Assemblies and 12 per cent in the Senate. The Government had also reserved 10 per cent quota for women in Central Superior Services across the board in the public sector.  B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review 25. During the interactive dialogue, 85 delegations made statements. Recommendations made during the dialogue are to be found in section II of the present report. 26. South Africa welcomed the enactment of the law creating an independent National Human Rights Commission in May 2012. It commended efforts to fight the challenge of terrorism and to improve the socio-economic condition of citizens. It made recommendations. 27. Spain thanked Pakistan for its participation in the universal periodic review exercise, and commitment in the work of the Human Rights Council. It congratulated Pakistan for the de facto moratorium since 2009 on the application of the death penalty. Spain made recommendations. 28. Sri Lanka commended the enactment of several laws to strengthen women’s rights and to combat violence against women. It highlighted the significance of the enactment of a new law creating an independent National Commission for Human Rights. It made recommendations. 29. The Sudan commended achievements in the implementation of UPR recommendations. It noted that Pakistan had highlighted challenges it faced, particularly violence and terrorist operations and bomb attacks and external drone attacks affecting many victims. Sudan asked about the legal basis for the use of drone strikes which had an impact on human rights. 30. Sweden expressed appreciation for the adoption of a number of laws and steps taken to protect women and girls from violence and discrimination. It welcomed the Government’s condemnation of the attack against the activist Malala Yosufzai. It made recommendations. 31. Switzerland congratulated the ratification of CAT, as recommended during Pakistan’s first-cycle review. It welcomed that most of the national reservations formulated upon ratification had now been lifted. It made recommendations. 32. Thailand commended the ratification of the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child, the enactment of new laws and administrative measures as well as the establishment of the National Commission for Human Rights. It also encouraged close collaboration with the international community regarding refugees. It made recommendations. 33. Tunisia noted progress in the promotion and protection of human rights, the constitutional reform, strengthening the independence of judiciary and the creation of the National Human Rights Commission. It praised Pakistan for its hospitality and generosity to refugees, and for combatting terrorism. Tunisia made recommendations. 34. Turkey commended the establishment of an independent Human Rights Commission. It welcomed amendments to the Constitution which resulted in the removal of anti-democratic practices introduced by military rulers. It made recommendations. 35. Turkmenistan noted with appreciation the ratification of ICCPR, CAT, and the CRPD and the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography (OP-CRC-SC). It made recommendations. 36. Uganda expressed appreciation on the ratification of several conventions such as ICCPR, CAT, CRPD and OP-CRC-SC. It commended the legislative reforms and its fight against terrorism. It made recommendations. 37. United Arab Emirates appreciated Pakistan’s efforts to protect economic and social rights, reduction of poverty, and improve education by making available financial and human resources for literacy programmes. It asked about the role of the National Committee for child development and education. It made a recommendation. 38. The United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland would welcome Pakistan’s view of the impact of blasphemy laws and referred to the recent case of Rimsha Masih. It encouraged Pakistan to consider adopting an official moratorium on the death penalty. It also referred to protection and political participation of women minority groups. It made recommendations. 39. The United States of America commended Pakistan for passing strong laws to protect women and the establishment of a National Human Rights Commission. It expressed serious concerns about the human rights situation in Baluchistan and also the violence against Shia, Christian and Ahmadi communities. It made recommendations. 40. Uruguay commended Pakistan for the approval of the 18th Constitutional Amendment and the creation of the National Commission for Human Rights. Uruguay expressed concern about the forced recruitment and military training of children by non-State agents, as well as for more than 8,000 prisoners on death row. Uruguay made recommendations. 41. Uzbekistan outlined the Constitution’s amendments to strengthen democratic institutions, and to ensure greater autonomy for regional authorities. It referred to the challenges faced in the fight against terrorism and to specific programmes for youth in this context. 42. The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela praised Pakistan for efforts to address challenges, particularly in the areas of the human rights of women, children, health, education, poverty and social exclusion, notwithstanding its economic limitations and natural disasters. Venezuela made recommendations. 43. Viet Nam commended the progress made in poverty reduction, social welfare and the health system. It noted the strengthening of the rule of law, the reform of the legal system, the empowerment of institutions for a better protection of human rights. It made a recommendation. 44. Zimbabwe noted the ratification of the majority of the core international instruments. It highlighted the establishment of a number of institutional and legislative measures such as the Ministry of Human Rights and the National Human Rights Commission. It made recommendations. 45. Algeria noted Pakistan’s commitment to the adoption of important laws for the protection of women. It considered that development, security and human rights were interlinked. It appreciated measures to fight terrorists and extremists, and noted the constraints as a developing country. Algeria made recommendations. 46. Argentina commended Pakistan for the creation of a National Human Rights Commission and for having ratified a number of international human rights instruments. Argentina made recommendations. 47. Australia commended the implementation of legislation such as the Acid Control Bill and the Anti-Women’s Practices Bill. It expressed concern about the human rights defenders who became target of life-threatening violence. It made recommendations. 48. Austria requested information on the implementation of the laws against acid attacks on women and sexual harassment. It also enquired about measures taken to prevent other extremists’ violence against women and girls as well as to curb extremists’ violence against minorities. It made recommendations. 49. Azerbaijan noted Pakistan’s accession to core human rights instruments. Azerbaijan expressed appreciation for the establishment of an independent National Commission for Human Rights in accordance with the Paris Principles. It made recommendations. 50. Bahrain appreciated the positive steps taken in the implementation of recommendations, and paid tribute to the adoption of laws to protect women rights. It noted the establishment of federal investigation agencies to combat trafficking and to protect victims, while Bahrain was seeking more information in this area. Bahrain made a recommendation. 51. Bangladesh called on the international community to extend its assistance and cooperation. It noted the ratification of almost all the major human rights treaties by Pakistan and invitations to a large number of special procedures to visit the country. 52. Belarus highlighted the Government’s efforts to improve national legislation and to strengthen policies and institutions. It regretted the persistent practice of bounded labour and corporal punishment of children. Belarus made recommendations. 53. Belgium recognized positive efforts such as the de facto moratorium on the death penalty but expressed concern over forced disappearances and extrajudicial executions. It asked about concrete measures to address violence against women. It made recommendations. 54. Bhutan noted with appreciation the establishment of a National Human Rights Commission, the ratification of a number of international human rights treaties, and the legislative framework to protect the most vulnerable groups. It made recommendations. 55. The Plurinational State of Bolivia commended Pakistan for the ratification of core international human rights instruments. It appreciated progress made in enacting a number of laws to eradicate the conditions that impede the enjoyment of the human rights of women. Bolivia made a recommendation. 56. Brazil commended the “de facto” moratorium on the death penalty during the past four years. It welcomed the ratification of seven of the core international human rights treaties, including ICCPR and CAT. It made recommendations. 57. Brunei Darussalam welcomed Pakistan’s efforts to protect the rights of women and empower them in the area of economic development through various legislative measures. It appreciated its leadership role as member of the Organization for Islamic Cooperation (OIC). It made recommendations. 58. Cambodia welcomed the ratification of many international treaties, encouraging Pakistan to incorporate them into legislation for their effective implementation. It also welcomed the adoption of the Protection of Women Act. It made recommendations. 59. Canada recalled its 2008 recommendations on amending legislation, including the Penal Code, for removing restrictions on freedom of religion which discriminate against persons belonging to minorities, and to permit the Ahmadis’ imprisonment for preaching their beliefs. Canada enquired about progress made on the subject. It made recommendations. 60. Chad noted that after its first UPR in 2008, political prisoners were released, civil liberties were restored and judicial prosecutions against lawyers and human rights defenders were dropped. It noted that certain traditional adverse practices remained, namely, acid attacks and sexual harassment.  It made recommendations. 61. China noted the legislative and administrative measures to advance the rights of women and children, to strengthen education and public health systems and promote harmony of different religious groups. China made a recommendation. 62. The Democratic Republic of Congo mentioned the recent judicial and institutional reforms. It highlighted the ratification of seven core international human rights instruments and the invitation extended to three special-procedures mandate holders. 63. The Czech Republic welcomed accession by Pakistan to ICCPR and CAT and other international human rights treaties. It made recommendations. 64. Costa Rica highlighted the ratification of international human rights instruments and the creation and strengthening of the commissions for the promotion and protection of human rights, encouraging Pakistan to continue along this avenue. It made recommendations. 65. Cuba praised Pakistan’s numerous achievements in promoting human rights. It noted Pakistan’s leadership role as a representative of developing countries in the Human Rights Council and expressed the hope that it will be elected as a Council member. It made a recommendation. 66. The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea commended Pakistan for creating an enabling environment for the promotion of human rights, such as independent judiciary, free media and a vibrant civil society.  It made recommendations. 67. Denmark acknowledged the Government’s commitment to freedom of religion but expressed concern about continued reports of violent persecutions, discrimination and forced conversion aimed at marginalized groups such as women, ethnic and religious minorities. It referred to the legal ambiguity whereby secular laws might be subject to sharia law. It made recommendations. 68. Djibouti was encouraged by efforts to establish a human rights infrastructure in line with international standards, including constitutional amendments to strengthen the National Election Commission to ensure independence and impartiality. Djibouti made recommendations. 69. Ecuador acknowledged the constitutional reforms and improvements of the judiciary and of the National Commission on Women. It encouraged the prompt establishment of the National Human Rights Commission, and ratification of two international human rights instruments. It welcomed Pakistan’s cooperation with United Nations bodies. Ecuador made recommendations. 70. The Adviser to the Prime Minister on Human Rights responded to questions by clarifying the role of the National Human Rights Commission  and its resources. The Commission will, inter alia, monitor the general human rights situation in the country; inquire into complaints of human rights violations; visit places of detention; review laws and recommend new legislation; and develop a national plan of action for the promotion and protection of human rights. The Adviser said that in order to ensure independence of the Commission, it has been made fully financially autonomous. 71. The Adviser on National Harmony stated that everyone was free to practise their faith and religion, as stated by the founder of Pakistan. He said that there was no organized intolerance toward religious minorities in Pakistan. Most cases of excess against members of minority communities were on account of personal animosities. He said that any violation of the rights of minorities had always been condemned by religious and political leaders. The Adviser said that the extremists were targeting not just the minorities but also the vast majority of Muslims who were moderate and did not subscribe to their extremist agenda. 72. On the issue of blasphemy, the Adviser said that there was a misunderstanding that this law was used to target only minorities. The majority of cases registered under this section had been against Muslims. The Government had taken measures to prevent possible misuse or abuse of the blasphemy law. An independent judiciary, free media and vibrant civil society also provided an effective safeguard against any misuse of the blasphemy law. 73. The Chairman, National Assembly Standing Committee on Human Rights, said that Pakistan strongly believed in the freedom of the press. Journalists were often targeted by extremists and terrorists and faced hurdles in performing their functions due to the very nature of their work. However, all cases of intimidation got immediate media attention and were duly addressed by the Government, the Parliament and the judiciary. 74. A delegation member said that poverty was a daunting challenge as it posed a major hurdle in the realization of the people’s potential. Pakistan had a fairly elaborate network of direct and indirect social-protection mechanisms that included employment-based guarantees, direct transfers and market-based interventions. 75. Pakistan had made efforts to create an enabling environment for the elimination of child labour through raising awareness among stakeholders and the masses, improvement in legislation, mobilizing resources for child-labour programmes and institution-building. Child Labour Units have been established at the federal and provincial levels to exclusively run and monitor child labour programmes throughout the country. 76. Egypt noted the recent constitutional amendment and welcomed the establishment of a human rights commission, and measures to strengthen the National Commission on Status of Women. It enquired about the incorporation of ratified international human rights treaties. It shared concerns over impacts of extremism and intolerance. Egypt made recommendations. 77. France welcomed the moratorium on executions, the adoption of legislation strengthening women’s rights and the visit undertaken by the Working Group on Disappearances. It remained concerned about persistent enforced disappearances, acts of religious intolerance, child labour and violence against women and girls. France made recommendations. 78. Germany was concerned about the remaining challenges in improving Pakistan’s human rights situation, including protecting religious minorities and other excluded groups. It thanked Pakistan for clarifying how the Blasphemy Law was implemented. Germany made recommendations. 79. Holy See welcomed steps taken to promote and protect human rights. It remained concerned about the cases of Asia Bibi and Rimsha Masih, accused under the Blasphemy Law, but noted the President’s intervention in clarifying the facts. It made recommendations. 80. Hungary welcomed the Government’s strong stand against the brutal attack on Malala Yousafzai. It asked how the Government would ensure the right to freedom of expression, given its positions on national security, religious morality and blasphemy. Hungary made recommendations. 81. Indonesia welcomed the ratification of key international human rights instruments since 2008. It expressed appreciation for measures adopted in social security and poverty alleviation. Indonesia made recommendations. 82. The Islamic Republic of Iran praised Pakistan’s efforts to enhance the socio-economic situation of its citizens and increase respect for human rights. It praised the progress made in improving the living conditions of the people. It made recommendations. 83. Iraq welcomed the release of political prisoners, the protection of freedoms and lifting control over media and the measures targeting lawyers and rights defenders. It commended the constitutional amendment, and appreciated the adoption of legislation to protect human rights. Iraq made recommendations. 84. Ireland commended Pakistan on the creation of a national human rights institution in accordance with the Paris Principles. It was concerned at reports of discriminatory teaching practices and the country-wide prevalence of bonded labour. Ireland made recommendations. 85. Italy welcomed the authorities’ condemnation of the attack on Malala Yousafzai, the ratification of important human rights treaties and the moratorium on executions. It urged Pakistan to remain committed to internal and international dialogue on human rights. Italy made recommendations. 86. Japan was concerned at reports of forced marriages, domestic violence, acid attacks on women, “honour killings” and low literacy rates among women and girls. It commended the appointment of women to high-level government posts. Japan made recommendations. 87. Jordan noted sincere and on-going efforts to promote and protect human rights and fundamental freedoms, and to strengthen the institutional framework for the protection of human rights, such as establishment of the Ministry for Human Rights and the Election Commission. Jordan made recommendations. 88. Kazakhstan supported Pakistan’s efforts to counter terrorism and safeguard security. It highlighted Pakistan’s role as coordinator of the OIC Group in Geneva and its active participation in the United Nations human rights mechanisms as one of the Muslim Ummah countries. 89. Kuwait noted the development on human rights in the last four years and the measures and the political will to cooperate with Human Rights Council, despite challenges. Kuwait made recommendations. 90. Kyrgyzstan welcomed the establishment of a human rights institution and efforts to increase female numbers in public and political life. It encouraged implementation of a monitoring and reporting mechanism to eliminate discrimination and violence against women. Kyrgyzstan made a recommendation. 91. Latvia noted that, while Pakistan had made efforts to improve its cooperation with United Nations special procedures, a number of requests by the special procedures mandate holders to visit Pakistan had not yet been accepted. Latvia made recommendations. 92. Lebanon appreciated Pakistan’s policy to promote human rights, pluralism, justice and the rule of law. Pakistan had been affected by conflict and natural disaster and refugees flow. It appreciated legislative reforms for promotion of economic and social development of women. Lebanon made recommendations. 93. Libya welcomed developments on implementation of recommendations, the establishment of NHRI, and efforts to protect human rights, particularly the constitutional amendment on administration and financial autonomy for the Federal Provinces. Libya made recommendations. 94. Malaysia welcomed progress made in promoting and protecting human rights through the strengthening of the legislative framework. It applauded advances in the areas of judicial independence, gender equality and the rights of individuals and vulnerable groups. Malaysia made recommendations. 95. Maldives welcomed constitutional amendments to strengthen the democratic process and protect human rights. It noted reforms to the judicial-appointment process to help guarantee an independent judiciary and maintain the rule of law. Maldives made recommendations. 96. Mauritania expressed appreciation for the establishment of National Human Rights Commission and efforts to implement the previous recommendations. It welcomed the adoption of a law to promote and to protect women’s rights, and the formulation of an economic and social strategy for women. Mauritania made recommendations. 97. Mexico recognized the progress achieved since the first UPR cycle, particularly the ratification of international human rights instruments, the creation of the National Human Rights Commission and adoption of recent laws to combat violence against women. It made recommendations. 98. Mongolia noted achievements in cooperating with international and regional human rights monitoring mechanisms, strengthening capacity to combat terrorism and extremism, and to promote and protect human rights. It welcomed new legislation and a commitment to ratifying international human rights instruments. 99. Morocco congratulated Pakistan for the adoption of a law to establish a commission on the status of women and the ratification of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. It inquired about measures being considered to bring laws at the provincial level in line with International Labour Organization standards. 100. Myanmar acknowledged key initiatives on human rights taken since 2008, including the ratification of several major international human rights instruments. It commended Pakistan on the enactment of legislation to promote and protect women’s rights. Myanmar made recommendations. 101. Namibia commended efforts to promote and protect human rights, including constitutional amendments to advance civil, political and social rights, ratification of international human rights instruments, participation in the Human Rights Council and establishing a human rights institution. Namibia made recommendations. 102. Nepal welcomed efforts to promote and protect human rights through institutional and legislative measures, to increase female political participation and adopt legal and administrative measures to protect women. It noted encouraging endeavours to address socio-economic challenges. Nepal made recommendations.  103. The Netherlands noted Pakistan’s positive attitude towards United Nations mechanisms, as displayed in the visit of the Working Group on Disappearances. It expressed concern about gender-based discrimination, for example the disparity between men and women in literacy rates. It made recommendations. 104. Nicaragua noted the institutional transformations, including the Human Rights Ministry. It welcomed the progress made, encouraging Pakistan to continue on the path of democracy and rule of law. Nicaragua made recommendations. 105. Norway welcomed efforts to enshrine fundamental human rights in domestic legislation, but was concerned about laws limiting religious freedom for minorities and about attacks on religious minorities. It was also concerned about attacks on journalists by security forces. Norway made recommendations. 106. Oman commended efforts in preparing the report and the consultation that presented the spirit of cooperation with the human rights mechanisms. It valued the ratification of the ICCPR, CAT, CRPD, and its Optional Protocol to the CRC. Oman made recommendations. 107. Palestine commended efforts to implement the UPR recommendations and the ratification of the CAT, CRPD and OP-CRC-SC, in addition to enacting legislation to strengthen the role of women in society and the steps taken to empower the National Commission on women and children. Palestine made recommendations. 108. The Philippines welcomed the establishment of the Ministry of Human Rights and the National Commission for Human Rights in accordance with the Paris Principles. It called for international support for Pakistan in shouldering the burden of foreign refugees. It made recommendations. 109. Qatar highlighted efforts made to strengthen human rights and fundamental freedoms despite challenges. It appreciated the progress made, especially the establishment of NHRC. It also valued the ratification of the CRPD and the OP-CRC-SC. Qatar made recommendations. 110. The Republic of Korea welcomed efforts to implement the recommendations made during the first UPR cycle and endeavours to ratify the ICCPR, CAT, CRPD and the OP-CRC-SC. It made recommendations. 111. The Russian Federation welcomed the ratification of international human rights instruments, stating that the task ahead would be to bring domestic legislation into line with its international obligations. It called upon Pakistan to continue efforts to combat terrorism and religious extremism. It made a recommendation. 112. Senegal commended the progress made in improving access to water and sanitation, and the establishment of institutions and mechanisms to protect civil liberties and children’s rights, including setting up a child-protection data collection system. Senegal made recommendations. 113. Singapore noted the challenges faced from terrorism, including how to de-radicalize young people and protect them from the influence of extremist elements. It noted educational and reintegration programmes introduced for children recovered from militants or extremists. Singapore made recommendations. 114. Slovakia noted the adoption of the National Commission for Human Rights Bill and new legislation to protect women and girls from violence. It commended Pakistan on the steps taken to restore the independence of the judiciary. Slovakia made recommendations. 115. Saudi Arabia underlined Pakistan’s positive interaction with human rights mechanism. It noted efforts to protect and promote human rights through structural and legal reforms, including the law that allows free and compulsory education for all children. It made recommendations. 116. Slovenia welcomed measures to improve labour rights, integrate a gender perspective in policies and programmes and advance women’s rights. Despite these measures, women continued to face inequalities and discrimination. It welcomed the ratification of international human rights instruments. Slovenia made recommendations. 117. The Minister thanked the delegations for acknowledging the achievements made by Pakistan in the field of human rights. The Minister highlighted the active role of the Pakistani media in exposing the cases that were usually highlighted by international media. 118. The Minister stated that women had played an active and crucial role in politics and society throughout our history. She said that the Government was fully aware of the challenges faced by women in their daily lives and it had taken a number of legal and institutional measures to protect them against harassment, violence and discrimination and to improve their access to education and health. 119. The Adviser on Human Rights said that the issue of enforced disappearances and missing persons had been at the forefront of the national debate in Pakistan. Ongoing proactive judicial and institutionalized efforts reflected the commitment of the Government to address this issue comprehensively. The Working Group has also clarified numerous cases of alleged disappearances pertaining to Pakistan in its recent sessions. 120. The Minister said that the Government was fully aware of the challenges in the realm of human rights; however, he assured that these challenges were not due to discriminatory Government policies or lack of commitment to protect and uphold human rights. The Minister said that the Government and people of Pakistan remained fully committed to democracy, freedom, justice and the rule of law. 121. Finally, the Minister thanked all delegations for the constructive participation, and assured that Pakistan would give serious consideration to all the comments and recommendations that had been made. She thanked the secretariat for the support to this process and the troika for the UPR process.  II. Conclusions and/or recommendations**  ** Conclusions and recommendations have not been edited. 122. The following recommendations will be examined by Pakistan which will provide responses in due time, but no later than the 22nd session of the Human Rights Council in March 2013. The response of Pakistan to these recommendations will be included in the outcome report adopted by the Human Rights Council at its 22nd session in March 2013.  122.1. Ratify the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance (CPED), the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court (ICC), the Optional Protocol to CEDAW, the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (OP-CRPD) and the Optional Protocol to CRC on the involvement of children in armed conflict (OP-CRC-AC) (Spain);  122.2. Ratify the Optional Protocols to CRC, on involvement of children in armed conflict (Iraq);  122.3. Ratify the Optional Protocol of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (Uruguay);  122.4. Ratify the Second Optional Protocol of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (Uruguay);  122.5. Ratify the OP-CAT (Brazil);  Accede to the OP-CAT and to establish its national preventive mechanism accordingly (Czech Republic);  122.6. Ratify or accede to the Rome Statute of the ICC, the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance (CPED), the Optional Protocol to CRC on the involvement of children in armed conflict (OP-CRC-AC) (Uruguay);  122.7. Ratify the Rome Statute of the ICC, the 1951 Refugees Convention and its 1967 Protocol, as well as the Conventions on statelessness (Austria);  Accede to the Convention relating to the Status of Refugees (Republic of Korea);  122.8. Take all appropriate steps to accede to the Rome Statute (Sweden);  Ratify the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court (Maldives);  Accede to the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court, including its Agreement on Privileges and Immunities (Slovakia);  Ratify the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court and fully align its national legislation with the provisions thereof (Hungary);  Ratify the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court and to fully align its legislation with all the obligations under the Rome Statute including incorporating the Rome Statute definition of crimes and general principles, as well as adopting provisions enabling cooperation with the Court (Latvia);  122.9. Ratify the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families (Indonesia);  122.10. Consider ratification of the third OP to CRC on a communication procedure (Slovakia); Consider ratifying other international human rights instruments to which it is not a party yet (Nicaragua);  Study the possibility of ratifying the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance (Argentina);  Reconsider ratifying the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance (Mexico);  122.11. Consider ratifying the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (OP-CAT) and the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court (Costa Rica);  Consider the possibility of ratifying the Optional Protocol to the CAT and the Rome Statute (Tunisia);  122.12. Consider ratifying the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Their Families as well as the ILO Convention 189 (Philippines);  Consider ratifying the Palermo Protocol on human trafficking (Philippines);  122.13. Withdraw remaining reservations to the ICCPR and the Convention against Torture and take immediate steps to incorporate both treaties into domestic legislation (Norway);  Withdraw the remaining reservations to the ICCPR and the CAT (Switzerland);  Withdraw the remaining reservations to ICCPR and to CAT (Slovenia);  Consider removing the reservations made to the ICCPR to ensure gender equality and women’s empowerment (Maldives);  122.14. Ensure equal political participation and withdraw reservations to articles 3 and 25 of the ICCPR as these reservations remain critical to ensure equality rights of women and men and equal opportunities (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland);  122.15. Continue stepping up efforts in the area of combating trafficking in persons, including considering acceding to the  Palermo Protocol  to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children, and invite the Special Rapporteur on trafficking in persons, especially women and children (Belarus);  122.16. Continue developing the institutional framework with respect to the promotion and protection of human rights (Jordan);  122.17. Continue its ongoing review of national laws to ensure that they are in line with its international human rights law obligations (Turkmenistan); Review of all relevant legislation and procedures to ensure systematic incorporation of international human rights obligations and their implementation on all levels of the government (Czech Republic); Align its national legislation with the ratified international human rights treaties (Slovenia); Continue working on the harmonization of its legislative domestic framework with the international human rights instruments to which it is a party (Nicaragua);  122.18. Promote the review of national legal provisions in the area of human rights, including constitutional provisions, to bring them into line with international standards (Mexico);  122.19. Repeal all provisions providing for mandatory death sentences with a view to abolishing them (Italy);  122.20. Specifically criminalize enforced disappearances in the penal code and reinforce the capacities of the Pakistanis Inquiry Commission on Enforced Disappearances in order that the Commission can fully carry out its mission (France);  122.21. Enact a provincial legislation on domestic violence as well as an increased number of support structures for women on the provincial level (Sweden);  122.22. Promote the repeal of all legal and administrative provisions remaining, which discriminate against women and girls (Mexico);  122.23. Sustain the positive momentum in upgrading its laws and institutions, in particular in the areas of the rights of women and children (Myanmar);  122.24. Expedite the adoption of the Charter of Child Rights Bill (Bhutan);  122.25. Adopt the Bill on Anti-Domestic Violence at the earliest possible (Maldives);  122.26. Continue strengthening and enhancing women rights through the enactment of relevant necessary laws while providing the necessary administrative and institutional mechanisms (Palestine);  122.27. Review and align the legislation with freedom of religion and belief and freedom of expression, as stipulated in the ICCPR (Sweden);  122.28. Ensure that blasphemy laws and their implementation are in line with international law (Switzerland); Enact legislation ensuring freedom of religion and belief for all religious groups and consider abolishing the so-called blasphemy laws (Austria); Repeal or reform thoroughly the so-called blasphemy law (Netherlands);  122.29. Continue adopting measures in the framework of freedom of expression as the new legislation on freedom of expression was passed (Lebanon);  122.30. Derogate the law on blasphemy guaranteeing in practice the right to freedom of religion (Spain);  122.31. Modify or repeal the blasphemy laws in order to bring them in line with the principles related to freedom of thought, conscience and religion, and in particular with its obligations under the ICCPR (Belgium);  122.32. Repeal discriminatory blasphemy laws against religious minorities and ensure that there is no impunity for those who commit hate crimes (Namibia); Repeal the blasphemy law and respect and guarantee freedoms of religion or belief and of expression and opinion for all, including Ahmadis, Hindus and Christians (France);  122.33. Repeal the blasphemy law, or at least amend it to protect persons from eventual abuses or false accusations and lighten corresponding penalties, that are currently disproportional (Holy See);  122.34. Share its expertise in developing a Special Child’s Rights Charter with other countries and continue its efforts in cooperation with international groups to advance this initiative (United Arab Emirates);  122.35. Continue strengthening the legislation for the elimination of all forms of discrimination against women (Uruguay);  122.36. Continue to strengthen its domestic legislative, institutional and administrative machinery to fight challenges such as poverty, illiteracy, gender disparity and social inequality (Zimbabwe);  122.37. Decriminalize adultery and non-marital consensual sex and to ensure punishment for all perpetrators of this violence and calls to it including members and leaders of jirgas (Czech Republic);  122.38. Amend discriminatory laws and vigilantly counter discrimination against marginalized groups, including women and girls, ethnic and religious minorities and provide a safe and just environment for all citizens in Pakistan (Denmark);  122.39. Enact efficient legislation to prohibit and prevent the employment of children as domestic workers (Slovakia);  122.40. Continue its ongoing efforts to advance the rights of women and make similar efforts in the protection and promotion of the rights of children, especially by adopting the relevant legal instruments (Republic of Korea);  122.41. Continue to enhance its efforts to protect women, children and other vulnerable groups against discrimination and violence (Singapore);  122.42. Continue its efforts to strengthen human rights institutions (Saudi Arabia);  Continue its efforts for strengthening human rights infrastructure (DPRK); Continue efforts in strengthening national human rights mechanisms (Nepal);  122.43. Strengthen efforts to conclude the formation of the Independent National Commission for Human Rights, and ensure that all human and financial resources are provided to ensure the performance of its tasks effectively and in an independent and transparent manner (Qatar);  122.44. Make available the necessary resources to the Human Rights Commission to effectively implement its important mandate (South Africa);  122.45. Provide competencies and budget to the recently established institutions for the defence and guarantee of human rights (Spain);  122.46. Provide adequate resources to the National Human Rights Commission and appoint independent and credible commissioners (United States of America);  122.47. Dedicate sufficient resources to national human rights institutions to enhance their effective functioning and independence (Egypt);  122.48. Speedily operationalize the National Commission for Human Rights (Algeria);  122.49. Further its endeavors with regard to the smooth and productive activity of the National Commission for Human Rights within the country (Azerbaijan);  122.50. Continue evaluating its national capacities so as to be in line with the international human rights treaties it has acceded to or ratified (Malaysia);  122.51. Effectively implement the recent legislation on strengthening women rights and adequately fund the newly established National Commission on the Status of Women (Germany);  122.52. Take steps to continue to strengthen the operation of domestic human rights institutions, including the Human Rights Ministry, National Human Rights Commission and the Commission of the Status of Women (Australia);  122.53. Put in place effective monitoring and reporting mechanisms to ensure respect for women’s rights and to address violence against women in all its forms (Slovenia);  122.54. Strengthen measures aimed at providing protection and assistance to vulnerable segments of society, including those children affected by natural disasters to protect them from trafficking and exploitation at work (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya);  122.55. Incorporate human rights into public policies and strengthen the human rights institutions (Ecuador);  122.56. Develop a national policy for the protection of human rights defenders and bring to justice all perpetrators of attacks on or threats against human rights defenders to combat impunity (Denmark);  122.57. Ensure adequate resources in implementing MDGs with priority focus on vulnerable groups such as women and children (Viet Nam);  122.58. Continue to prioritize policies aimed at improving the socio-economic condition of its citizens (South Africa);  122.59. Continue its policies on improving the rights of the child (Jordan);  122.60. Develop a clear implementation and monitoring plan for the Bonded Labour System (Abolition) Act, 1992, the Bonded Labour System (Abolition) Rules, 1995 and the National Policy and Plan of Action for the Abolition of Bonded Labour, 2001 (Ireland);  122.61. Create mechanisms to protect and support victims of sexual violence or gender violence (Switzerland);  122.62. Concentrate on the implementation of the international human rights instruments that have been ratified by Pakistan (Turkmenistan);  122.63. Continue providing and improving human rights education and training for judicial and law enforcement officials (Uganda);  122.64. Continue providing and improving human rights education and training for judicial and law enforcement officials (Democratic People’s Republic of Korea);  122.65. Enhance its efforts in the area of human rights education, training and awareness for its officials involved in the implementation of the related human rights law and legislation (Malaysia);  122.66. Adopt a national plan with provisions to implement the legislations on women’s rights (Brazil);  122.67. Continue advancing in the promotion and protection of women’s rights, with the consolidation of all institutional mechanisms and the application of the laws being launched (Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of))  122.68. Continue adopting its social policies of access to services on education and health, in particular for women and girls (Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of));  122.69. Consolidate the gains already made in the sphere of human rights through awareness programmes (Zimbabwe);  122.70. Maintain its policy of broadening and strengthening international cooperation in the sphere of human rights (Zimbabwe);  122.71. Develop a comprehensive strategy to prevent sexual exploitation of children and their cruel treatment and increase criminal liability for these crimes (Belarus);  122.72. Continue to develop and enhance programmes to provide education and support to children who have been recovered from militants or extremists, and to help them reintegrate into society (Singapore);  122.73. Continue to work by including human rights in general policies and placing people at the core of development (Saudi Arabia);  122.74. Continue to design and implement policies and programmes on pro-poor growth, job creation and income generation (Myanmar);  122.75. Continue to strengthen democratic institutions and pursue efforts to promote civil society and the media (Mauritania);  122.76. Continue to take necessary measures for carrying those reforms taken towards a consolidated democracy rapidly into effect (Turkey);  122.77. Continue cooperating with treaty monitoring bodies regarding follow-up and implementation of its treaty obligations (Nicaragua);  122.78. Step up its cooperation with the special procedures of the Human Rights Council by responding positively to the pending visit requests of special procedures mandate holders and eventually consider extending a standing invitation to all the special procedures mandate holders of the Human Rights Council (Latvia);  122.79. Extend a standing invitation to the Special Procedures of the Human Rights Council and accept the competence of the treaty bodies in complaints, inquiry and urgent action procedures (Costa Rica);  122.80. Continue to provide access to UN Special Procedure mandate-holders who are seeking to help Pakistan to identify and address human rights challenges (Australia);  122.81. Issue an open invitation to the UN Special Rapporteurs (Belgium); Extend a standing invitation to all HRC Special Procedures (Hungary); Issue invitations to the Special Rapporteurs to assess the human rights situation in the country (Iraq); Consider issuing standing invitation to all special procedures of the Human Rights Council (Norway);  122.82. Continue its efforts at the level of legislations and implementation in order to protect women rights and empower their emancipation economically and politically (Lebanon)  122.83. Continue developing adequate measures to guarantee in law and practice the equality of women, particularly their right to education, and fight effectively discrimination against women and gender violence (Spain);  122.84. Intensify its efforts to effectively implement the laws on discrimination against women, and on the promotion and protection of children (Tunisia);  122.85. Steadily implement as well as further enhance measures to address discrimination and violence against women (Japan);  122.86. Continue with its work in the area of women’s rights adopting a gender perspective in all public and private scenarios and encouraging the empowerment of women with a view to challenging the current inequality in the society (Bolivia (Plurinational State of));  122.87. Take deterrent measures to combat discrimination against women, girls and religious minorities and work towards eliminating poverty among those groups (Iraq);  122.88. Continue to spearhead progress toward the promotion of gender equality and development for women, in particular in areas of education and employment (Cambodia);  122.89. Maintain the momentum to protect the rights of women as well as to empower women in the area of economic development through various legislative measures and institutional mechanisms (Brunei Darussalam);  122.90. Take necessary measures to end harmful traditional practices against women, sexual harassment in public and work places and domestic violence (Chad);  122.91. Continue working for the welfare of children, women and persons with disabilities (Nepal);  122.92. Continue its efforts for the improvement of the health system and the elimination of discrimination against women and discrimination on the basis of caste (Holy See);  122.93. Increase its endeavours on promotion and protection of women’s rights especially in rural areas (Islamic Republic of Iran);  122.94. Continue organizing awareness educational courses on human rights, including training on equality between women and men, and on women’s rights (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya);  122.95. Continue to work towards the empowerment of women and the promotion and protection of all their rights and intensify efforts and programmes to combat the phenomenon of trafficking of women and children (Qatar);  122.96. Further enhance measures to combat and prevent discrimination against vulnerable groups (Myanmar);  122.97. Train its law enforcement personnel on gender sensitivity and equality (Slovakia);  122.98. Definitely abolish the death penalty (France); Abolish the death penalty (Namibia); Abolish the death penalty (Spain); Consider definitely abolishing the death penalty in its domestic legislation (Ecuador);  122.99. Consider the possibility of derogating the death penalty of its juridical regime (Argentina);  122.100. Declare an official moratorium on the death penalty (United Kingdom); Declare a moratorium on executions with a view to abolishing the death penalty (Uruguay); Establish a moratorium on the death penalty, as a first step towards complete abolition of this practice and accession to the Second Optional Protocol to the ICCPR (Australia); Promptly establish a de jure moratorium on the death penalty (Belgium);  122.101. Implement measures to protect the right to life and freedom of expression of human rights defenders, and ensure that the perpetrators of violence are brought to justice (Australia);  122.102. Take steps to implement laws and policies with a view to eliminating early and forced marriage (Canada);  122.103. Take effective measures to prevent forced or early marriage, in particular with a view to ending rape, sexual exploitation and forced conversions of scheduled caste girls (Austria);  122.104. Adopt all possible measures to prevent and explicitly prohibit in its legal order the recruitment of children and their participation in armed actions and terrorist activities (Uruguay);  122.105. Continue fighting against trafficking of children and violence against women (Djibouti);  122.106. Prohibit child labour of minors under the age of 14 (France);  122.107. Ensure the reporting and investigation of cases of violence against women, effective awareness campaign against violence and consolidate measures to address sexual abuses and exploitation of children (Egypt);  122.108. Ensure that women are not submitted to illegal parallel judicial system (Italy);  122.109. Continue the reform of the judiciary, law enforcement and penitentiary system, as well as continue the policy to reduce crime and corruption (Russian Federation);  122.110. Take measures to combat impunity of all those who attack human rights defenders (Spain);  122.111. Reinforce its efforts to fight impunity regarding cases of enforced disappearance by bringing all responsible persons to justice (Switzerland);  122.112. Hold accountable those who commit religiously motivated acts of violence (United States of America);  122.113. Investigate attacks and violence against religious minorities and sects and bring those responsible to justice (Norway);  122.114. Take effective measures against enforced disappearances by strengthening the Commission of Inquiry and expanding their mandate to all security agencies (Germany); Vest the national Commission on Inquiry on Enforced Disappearances greater authority and resources to conduct investigations (Sweden);  122.115. Ensure investigations and prosecution of those responsible for abduction and enforced disappearances and encourage the Supreme Court to continue investigation on this problem. (Belgium);  122.116. Increase its efforts to promptly investigate all human rights abuses and prosecute alleged perpetrators (Hungary);  122.117. Take steps to bring to justice those who have threatened, or attacked human rights defenders, children, and others who are working to promote democracy and accountability in Pakistan (Canada);  122.118. Bring to justice perpetrators of attacks on journalists by effectively investigating all individuals and organizations accused of such abuses (Norway);  122.119. Introduce strong legislation prohibiting attacks against journalists to effectively investigate such acts and prosecute the perpetrators (Austria);  122.120. Continue the on-going reform process in order to consolidate democracy and the rule of law (Kyrgyzstan);  122.121. Continue efforts to enhance legislations and measures to further address the situation of religious minorities, including blasphemy laws, force conversion and discrimination against non-Muslim minorities (Thailand);  122.122. Continue and consolidate efforts in promoting dialogue, tolerance and social cohesion (Egypt);  122.123. Continue its measures aimed at the promotion of interfaith dialogue and the culture of tolerance (Azerbaijan);  122.124. Substantially re-consider the punishment related to religious offences (Italy);  122.125. Actively support programmes strengthening religious freedom and tolerance especially in the run-up to the elections in 2013 (Germany);  122.126. Take preventive and punitive measures against instigation of religious hatred (Germany);  122.127. Remove restrictions on accessing internet in the country, which runs counter to the criteria of the ICCPR and the principle of proportionality (Netherlands);  122.128. Continue to design and implement growth and job creation programmes targeting the most disfavoured of the population (Mauritania);  122.129. Continue strengthening its programmes of employment creation, food and assistance to the most vulnerable in the fight against poverty and social inequality (Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of));  122.130. Intensify development programmes with focus on poverty alleviation and food security (Algeria);  122.131. Continue to strengthen its efforts in tackling poverty and enhancing access to basic social services such as health and education, especially for those living in rural areas (Bhutan);  122.132. Continue addressing poverty reduction and social inequality through further development and implementation of relevant programmes and policies (Cambodia);  122.133. Redouble its efforts to maintain continuing progress in fighting poverty (Ecuador);  122.134. Continue its efforts for a systematic and sustained training process of child as well as developing the Child Protection Management Information System (CPMIS) and advancement in child immunization (Iran(Islamic Republic of));  122.135. Continue its efforts to fight against poverty and illiteracy (Senegal);  122.136. Continue its efforts to accelerate the achievement of the MDGs targets, particularly those related to health (Turkmenistan); Continue with its efforts towards the achievement of MDGs, in particular in the area of health of the population (Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of));  122.137. Continue to work on strengthening access to health care services, particularly for vulnerable groups of society (Bahrain);  122.138.  Implement a sanitation programme in order to eradicate poliomyelitis and tuberculosis which remain public health problems (Djibouti);  122.139. Take additional measures to facilitate access to health service for all members of society, especially women (Oman);  122.140. Continue strengthening its efforts to improve the socio-economic conditions of its people especially on promoting the rights to education for all its young citizens (Brunei Darussalam);  122.141. Strengthen its efforts to combine social security and poverty alleviation measures with the free and compulsory education programme that will enable the provision of the free education for all children (Indonesia);  122.142. Formulate executive plans for attaining the MDG on primary and free education by 2015 (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya);  122.143. Increase its allocation of resources devoted to education (Netherlands);  122.144. Continue current efforts to increase the literacy rate and promote universal access to education (Cuba);  122.145. Continue its efforts to ensure the enrolment of all segments of society in education (Oman);  122.146. Consider providing universal free primary education to all children, regardless of their sex, nationality, race or ethnic origin (Thailand);  122.147. Continue to make efforts to expand access to education, especially for girls (Japan);  122.148. Ensure and allocate sufficient resources for girls’ education in all provinces (Namibia);  122.149. Review public school curricula in order to eliminate prejudice against religious and other minorities (Germany);  122.150. Improve the education system and school textbooks and promote the full safeguarding of religious freedom and other human rights by programmes which, beginning in primary school and within the context of religious instruction, will educate everyone to respect their brothers in humanity (Holy See);  122.151. Take all appropriate measures to combat and prevent discrimination against children belonging to religious or other minority groups, including by removing educational material which could serve to perpetuate discrimination (Ireland);  122.152. Include human rights education in school curricular (Palestine);  122.153. Continue with its measures to protect children and improve their access to education (Senegal);  122.154. Analyse the possibility of adopting the necessary additional measures to combat and prevent discrimination against religious minorities (Argentina);  122.155. Increase action to tackle violations of religious freedom especially, but not only, against members of religious minorities (Italy);  122.156. Adopt measures to ensure the protection of religious minorities, including Ahmadis, Christians, Hindus and Sikhs, prevent the abuse of blasphemy legislation, halt forced conversions, and take necessary steps to prevent violence against members of religious minority communities (Canada);  122.157. Take appropriate, efficient measures to prevent discrimination and violence against religious minorities, bringing instigators to religious violence to justice (Slovakia);  122.158. Enforce the measures and policies that Pakistan has undertaken to ensure the participation of minorities in an appropriate way in the political life (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya);  122.159. Start a national dialogue with the aim of enacting a national IDP policy consistent with the UN Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement (Austria);  122.160. Continue its efforts to alleviate poverty and promote sustainable economic and social development so as to allow its people to better enjoy all human rights (China);  122.161. Achieve MDGs in order to design and implement comprehensive prevention programmes, and  address food insecurity and malnutrition by adopting policies at federal and provincial levels to make vaccines mandatory (Djibouti);  122.162. Continue its efforts to speed-up attaining Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), particularly those related to health (Kuwait);  122.163. Increase efforts to enhance the enjoyment of economic, social and cultural rights, which will enable the related rights to work, education, health and housing to be enforced (Saudi Arabia);  122.164. Continue its efforts to combat social inequality and poverty (Kuwait);  122.165. Continue its efforts to combat terrorism (Kuwait). 123. The recommendation below did not enjoy the support of Pakistan:  123.1. Halt operations aimed at silencing dissent in Balochistan and ensure laws are fully equally enforced to investigate and prosecute those responsible for torture and enforced disappearances nationwide (United States of America). 124. All conclusions and/or recommendations contained in the present report reflect the position of the submitting State(s) and/or the State under review. They should not be construed as endorsed by the Working Group as a whole. Annex [English only]   Composition of the delegation  The delegation of Pakistan was headed by Ms. Hina Rabbani Khar, Minister for Foreign Affairs and composed of the following members: • Mr. Mustafa Nawaz Khokhar, Advisor to Prime Minister on Human Rights/Federal Minister; • Dr. Paul Bhatti, Advisor to Prime Minster on National Harmony/Federal Minister; • Mr. Riaz Fatyana, Chairman, National Assembly Standing Committee on Human Rights; • Dr. Araish Kumar, Member,  National Assembly; •  H.E. Mr. Zamir Akram, Ambassador & Permanent Representative, Permanent Mission of Pakistan; •  Mr. Aizaz Ahmad Chaudhry, Additional Secretary (UN&EC), Ministry of Foreign Affairs; • Mr. Moazzam Ahmad Khan, Director General (Foreign Minister’s Office), Ministry of Foreign Affairs; •  Mr. Shafqat Ali Khan, Member Deputy Permanent Representative, Permanent Mission of Pakistan; • Mr. Adnan Nasir, Counsellor, Permanent Mission of Pakistan; • Ms. Mariam Aftab, Counsellor, Permanent Mission of Pakistan; • Mr. Mohammad Aamir Khan, First Secretary, Permanent Mission of Pakistan; • Ms. Saima Saleem, Assistant Director (Human Rights), Ministry of Foreign Affairs; • Mr. Muhammad Saeed Sarwar, First Secretary, Permanent Mission of Pakistan; • Dr. Ahsan Nabeel, Second Secretary, Permanent Mission of Pakistan; • Mr. Irfan Mehmood Bokhari, Third Secretary, Permanent Mission of Pakistan.     