United Nations A/HRC/13/10 Distr.: General 4 January 2010 Original: English General Assembly Human Rights Council Thirteenth session Agenda item 6 Universal Periodic Review Report of the Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review* Portugal * Previously issued under document symbol A/HRC/WG.6/6/L.9. The annex to the present report is circulated as received. Contents Paragraphs Page Introduction............................................................................................................. 1–4 3 I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process................................................ 5–100 3 A. Presentation by the State under review........................................................... 5–24 3 B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review........................ 25–100 6 II. Conclusions and/or recommendations..................................................................... 101–105 15 Annex Composition of the delegation ......................................................................................................... 22 Introduction 1. The Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review, established in accordance with Human Rights Council resolution 5/1 of 18 June 2007, held its sixth session from 30 November to 11 December 2009. The review of Portugal was held at the 9th meeting, on 4 December 2009. The delegation of Portugal was headed by H.E. Mr. Pedro Lourtie, Secretary of State for European Affairs and H.E., Mr. José Conde Rodrigues, Secretary of State for Internal Affairs. At its 13th meeting, held on 8 December 2009, the Working Group adopted the present report on Portugal. 2. On 7 September 2009, the Human Rights Council selected the following group of rapporteurs (troika) to facilitate the review of Portugal: Belgium, Hungary and Qatar. 3. In accordance with paragraph 15 of the annex to resolution 5/1, the following documents were issued for the review of Portugal: (a) A national report submitted/written presentation made in accordance with paragraph 15 (a) (A/HRC/WG.6/6/ PRT/1 and Corr.1); (b) A compilation prepared by the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) in accordance with paragraph 15 (b) (A/HRC/WG.6/6/ PRT/2); (c) A summary prepared by OHCHR in accordance with paragraph 15 (c) (A/HRC/WG.6/6/PRT/3).  4. A list of questions prepared in advance by Argentina, the Czech Republic, the Netherlands, Sweden and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland was transmitted to Portugal through the troika. These questions are available on the extranet of the Working Group. I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process A. Presentation by the State under review 5. The Portuguese delegation noted that the preparation of the review had been a good challenge, which had brought many opportunities for improvement in its human rights situation. 6. Portugal informed that the Government was considering a proposal to create a National Human Rights Commission. This would be a government body that would coordinate the inter-ministerial work in the field of human rights. It would significantly improve its ability to participate in exercises such as the universal periodic review, the presentation of national reports to treaty bodies, and, first and foremost, would bring clear added value to the concrete implementation of human rights. It was hoped that Portugal could formally announce its creation in March 2010 at Council. 7. Portugal further noted that this Commission would be different in nature from its national human rights institution, the Ombudsman (Provedor de Justiça), which fulfils the criteria of the Paris Principles and was accredited with “A” status since 1999. 8. Portugal noted the appointment of a Secretary of State for Equality, who will have within her priorities the fourth National Plan for Equality and Against Domestic Violence and the second National Plan against Trafficking in Human Beings. She will promote women’s entrepreneurship in the context of fighting the global economic and financial crisis. The Government will propose to Parliament the adoption of an Equality Act and a new legislation to allow same sex marriages. 9. Portugal was recognized by the United Nations in the context of the 2009 Human Development Report, as the highest ranked country in the world regarding the provision of support services and access to rights by immigrants. Portugal considered this as a tribute not only to the efforts of its public administration but also to the efforts of civil society, private companies, non-governmental organizations, and immigrants themselves with whom Portugal had been able to work in true partnership to achieve this result. 10. Portugal had deposited the instruments of ratification of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and its Optional Protocol. Portugal had also signed the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights. Portugal reaffirmed its deep commitment to this new human rights instrument. 11. Portugal informed that since the 2007 amendment of the Criminal Code, domestic violence had became a specific crime, punishable with 1 to 5 years of imprisonment. The prohibition of corporal punishment of children was explicitly confirmed. Two laws setting the priorities and orientations of criminal policy for the period 2007–2009 and 2009–2011 had both placed domestic violence among the priorities of criminal investigation and prevention. 12. This legal framework was completed past September with the enactment of a Law on compensation to victims of violent crimes and domestic violence and of a separate Law on the legal regime applicable to the prevention of domestic violence and to the protection and assistance to its victims, both of which were intended to prevent and repress domestic violence behaviour as well as to support and promote the autonomy and empowerment of the victims. 13. Further, other measures to fight this problem have been included in the third National Plan against Domestic Violence (2007–2010), of which more than 60 per cent had already been implemented. Special emphasis had been placed in the training of agents more directly involved with the protection and assistance of domestic violence victims, including judges and police agents.  14. Regarding the use of force by security, judicial and prison officers, including training and accountability in case of excessive use of force or other violations of human rights, Portugal informed that all officers received specific training in human rights throughout their careers. Police forces were subject to the law and to the strict respect of human rights as established in the Constitution. Accordingly, any violation of human rights would give rise to criminal liability. Police officers were also subject to their disciplinary status. All allegations of ill-treatment by any of the officers were investigated and those found responsible were punished. 15. Portugal informed that the prison system, as a whole, was not in an overcrowding situation. The current rate of occupation was 92.6 per cent. However, isolated situations of overcrowding existed, namely in the Autonomous Region of Azores. The building of two new prisons was planned to address this. The protection of the rights of children of prisoners was ensured in accordance with the principle of the best interest of the child which, in the Portuguese legislation, governs all measures and actions affecting children. Measures to provide education, training and work to prisoners have been widened in the last years with good results. In 2008 35 per cent of the prisoners attended educational programmes. 16. Portugal informed that the 2007 amendments to the Criminal Code and Criminal Procedure Code aimed to reinforce the rights and guarantees of citizens and did not in any way collide with human rights. The preventive arrest time limits were reduced, to safeguard that no one was deprived from liberty for periods longer than the ones strictly needed for investigation or conclusion of procedures. The possibility of coercive measures alternative to preventive arrest was expanded. As for judicial secrecy, the reform aimed at reducing its scope. In what concerns possible future changes, an independent authority – the Permanent Observatory of Portuguese Justice – had monitored the amendments and its impact and a commission created by the Ministry of Justice would evaluate if further changes were needed. 17. Portugal emphasized that procedural rights were granted to all detainees within the judicial system: The defendant has, in every stage of the procedure, the right to be assisted by a lawyer. The detainee has the right to contact his lawyer immediately after detention and to communicate with him, orally or in written form, at any time during day or night. The right to the appointment of an interpreter is established in the Criminal Procedure Code.  18. Portugal recognized that a gender pay gap still persisted in the private sector. However, statistics indicated a positive trend, from 2004 to 2007, being presently 18.8 per cent. The Commission for Equality in Labour and Employment had only received 3 complaints related to gender pay gap in the period between 2006 and 2009. 19. The new Labour Code enacted in 2009 established that women were entitled to receive equal pay for equal work or work of equal value and reinforced this rule through specific regulations on the question of gender-based equality and non-discrimination. 20. Portugal underscored that Portuguese law provided for sufficient and adequate protection of the principle of non-refoulement. The system was in full compliance with the international obligation to ensure protection from torture as set out in article 7 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.  21. Portugal noted the creation of an Observatory for Trafficking in Human Beings, which produces, collects, analyses and disseminates data about trafficking and other forms of gender-based violence; the implementation of an articulated model of signalization, identification and integration of victims of trafficking, which involves all police forces and relevant non-governmental organizations; the creation of temporary shelter specific for victims of trafficking, run by an NGO with government funding; and that the National Plan’s implementation was being monitored by an independent entity who shall conduct its impact assessment. As of October 2009, there had been 231 signalled cases of trafficking, 41 confirmed cases, and 16 persons are now in support and protection centres. 22. Portugal signed the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment in 2006. Portugal expressed wish to ratify it once the independent national preventive mechanism to examine the treatment of people in detention is in place.  23. Portugal informed that its Plan of Action for the Integration of Persons with Disabilities promoted a policy of inclusion of students with permanent special educational needs in the regular educational system. Following the adoption of this Plan, legislation was approved in 2008, providing for, inter alia, the development and implementation of Individual Transition Plans, promoting the transition to post-school life and, when possible, to the labour market.  24. Portugal stated that the universal periodic review had set the stage for the most in-depth and comprehensive analysis of the national human rights situation. The need for stronger and sustained inter-ministerial coordination was a challenge that had come to the fore. B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review 25. During the interactive dialogue, statements were made by 47 delegations. A number of delegations commended on Portugal’s commitment to the promotion and protection of human rights, particularly economic, social and cultural rights. They also appreciated the substantive and comprehensive national report, detailed presentation and the responses to advance questions. Tribute was also paid to Portugal’s international leadership in the advancement of social, economic and cultural rights, particularly its key role in the negotiations that led to the adoption of the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights. Further, Portugal was commended for its comprehensive approach in combating the negative impacts of the current economic and financial crises on all human rights. Recommendations made during the interactive dialogue are listed in Chapter II of the present report. 26. Belarus commended on efforts to promote the integration of migrants, to support cultural diversity and stimulate intercultural dialogue. Belarus noted the 2008 law on asylum, which expanded the rights and protected the interest of asylum seekers. It noted important efforts being carried out to combat trafficking in persons, to prevent violence in the family, and to ensure gender equality. Belarus made a recommendation. 27. China commended on efforts in promoting gender equality and combating domestic violence, racial discrimination and human trafficking. China enquired about measures envisaged to address drop-out rates among girls and children in middle schools, as well as measures taken to protect the economic, social and cultural rights of minorities, especially the Roma. China made a recommendation. 28. Brazil recognized efforts regarding non-discrimination and integration of immigrants particularly legal provisions for all children, regardless of the irregular situation of his/her parents, to have access to education. Brazil expressed concern about allegations regarding police misconduct towards ethnic minorities or persons of non-Portuguese origin. Brazil asked whether Portugal was considering recommendations of the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination to introduce a provision in the criminal law that committing an offense with racist motivation or aim shall constitute an aggravating circumstance. Brazil made recommendations. 29. Finland requested maintaining the mechanism set up to prepare the national report after the review. They enquired about the targeted measures taken in implementing the recommendations of the human rights mechanisms on the rights of the Roma minority in areas such as housing, education and access to employment and how this minority was involved in this process. On violence against women and domestic violence, Finland asked about concrete measures taken to ensure the effectiveness of law and targeted special programmes put in place in connection with the implementation. Finland made a recommendation. 30. Canada welcomed improvements made regarding the rights of children with disabilities and their integration into mainstream education. Canada noted reports of ill-treatment of detainees and in some cases excessive use of force by the police. Canada appreciated the Government’s recognition that domestic violence remained a problem, and that it had implemented the National Plan against Domestic Violence of 2007–2010. Canada made recommendations. 31. The Philippines recognized that the Government had established national institutions, requesting information about the High Commission for Immigration and Intercultural Dialogue, and on how it promoted intercultural dialogue at the local level and its role in promoting the rights of migrants. Philippines noted the challenges regarding the persistence of domestic violence and the challenge of the identification of victims of human trafficking. Philippines made recommendations. 32. While commending on efforts to build a culture of tolerance and to eliminate all forms of discrimination, Cuba noted that the problem persisted, particularly affecting women, migrants and minorities such as the Roma. Cuba asked about additional measures to be taken to remedy this situation. Cuba expressed concern about the de facto discrimination against children and families living in poverty in the rural and urban less developed areas. Cuba noted the alarming number of street children and their vulnerability to the worst forms of child labour. Cuba made recommendations. 33. Azerbaijan commended Portugal’s role in the establishment of the mandate of the Special Rapporteur on the right to education and its commitment to cooperating with the Special Procedures. Azerbaijan noted efforts to address the issue of domestic violence and to implement the United Nations resolution 1325 and legislative amendments to promote gender equality and the advancement of women. Azerbaijan enquired about measures being implemented by the Commission for Citizenship and Gender Equality to effectively address discrimination against women, and gender equality. Azerbaijan made a recommendation. 34. Germany appreciated information on measures being undertaken to address the problem of domestic violence. Germany requested further information on efforts to address the problem of street children. 35. Egypt noted the role played by the Office of the Ombudsman and Portugal’s commitment to establish a national human rights institution. Egypt noted the national plans in the areas of promoting gender equality, the elimination of child labour, achieving equality and non-discrimination and the integration of immigrants in Portuguese society. Egypt requested more information on the steps taken or to be taken to implement these plans. Egypt recognized the plan for the integration of immigrants, including equal access to employment, health care and education, and the steps taken in the fight against racism, xenophobia and racial discrimination, requesting more information on the Portuguese experience in this regard. Egypt made recommendations. 36. Malaysia commended Portugal’s strong institutional framework for the promotion and protection of human rights. Malaysia welcomed national policies that combine fostering economic competitiveness with enhancing social justice and cohesion. Malaysia noted that certain segments of society, namely poor children and families and Roma women were at risk of being socially and economically excluded, requesting further information on measures to address this situation. Malaysia made recommendations. 37. The Netherlands welcomed progress made regarding the integration of immigrants and measures to prevent non-discrimination and equality. While noting steps taken to address the situation of the Roma, the Netherlands expressed concern concerning issues such as housing, education, employment and health. It expressed interest about lessons learned and results of the 2007–2010 National Plan against Trafficking in Human Beings. It noted reports of concerns about the situation of street children. The Netherlands made recommendations. 38. Algeria noted efforts to guarantee the fulfilment of women’s rights. Algeria asked about the difficulties faced in the implementation of budgetary policies aimed at promoting gender equality in the context of the global economic crisis. Algeria was encouraged by Portugal’s immigration policies. Algeria welcomed the Government’s commitment to improving national mechanisms to monitor the implementation of its international obligations. Algeria made recommendations. 39. India noted the Constitutional framework regarding human rights, especially the policies and programmes aimed at social protection reforms. India also noted efforts at strengthening gender equality policies and reforming the Criminal and Criminal Procedure Codes. India requested information about Portugal’s experience with the Parity Law, and about the scope and functioning of the Observatory of Trafficking in Human Beings. India made recommendations. 40. Turkey noted the establishment and recent election of the Ombudsman. It requested information on the National Human Rights Plan and the new national institution to be established to monitor the implementation of human rights obligations, including how this new national institution will differentiate from the functions of the Ombudsman, and what affiliation this will have with it. 41. The Islamic Republic of Iran raised concerns about racism and racial discrimination against immigrants and ethnic minorities, poor conditions in prisons and detention centres, and human trafficking, asking about the concrete measures taken to effectively address these issues. It noted concerns regarding the lack of a national human rights plan and of a comprehensive national strategy for the implementation of the Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC). It made recommendations. 42. Mexico commended on strengthening the budget to promote gender equality and decreasing the number of imprisoned persons during the last year. Mexico welcomed the measures adopted to avoid the deportation of foreigners to countries where they might be in danger. Mexico welcomed that victims of trafficking are entitled to residency permits. Mexico appreciated the information provided on the progress made regarding rights of persons with disabilities, asking about measures to elaborate on a comprehensive strategy in this regard. Mexico made recommendations. 43. Slovenia welcomed Portugal’s promotion of gender equality in society. Slovenia requested elaborating on the concrete results of the third plan against domestic violence and the first plan against trafficking in human beings and sharing good practices. Slovenia noted the concern expressed by the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women on the numerous cases of violence against women and its call for the implementation of legislation thereon. Slovenia enquired about access to complaints mechanisms for victims and about the resources to ensure that a sufficient number of safe crisis centres and shelters are available for women victims of violence. Slovenia noted the lack of a comprehensive national strategy to implement CRC. Slovenia made recommendations. 44. Italy noted that domestic violence was still a matter of concern, asking about the authorities’ plans to address this issue. Italy commended on the progress made towards solving prison overcrowding and facilitating the reintegration of former detainees. Italy expressed concern about reported cases of excessive use of force by prison staff and law enforcement officers in general. Italy welcomed the legislative framework to combat trafficking in persons, albeit limited implementation. Italy made recommendations. 45. Belgium noted the various national strategies to improve human rights protection, including the Plan for Integration of Immigrants, and the establishment of the High Commission for Immigration and Intercultural Dialogue and the National Plan against Trafficking in Human Beings. Belgium noted the discrimination and police violence against the Roma, asking about planned measures for the effective integration of the Roma into society, and to re-establish the trust of the Roma community with the law enforcement and judicial authorities. Belgium made recommendations. 46. Pakistan appreciated that the consultation process for the preparation of the national report would continue in the follow-up phase. Pakistan noted the institutions and mechanisms under the judicial, legislative and executive branches of the Government to promote and protect human rights. Pakistan enquired whether the Observatory Trafficking in Human Beings was serving the intended objectives. Pakistan asked why Portugal had not signed the Convention on the Rights of Migrant Workers. Referring to a 2007 recommendation of the Committee against Torture that Portugal provide information on measures to relinquish the use of electric “TaserX26” weapons, Pakistan requested information on the follow-up to this recommendation. 47. Regarding cases of violence against ethnic minorities, the Czech Republic asked about existing complaint mechanisms for victims or their families. It appreciated Portugal’s detailed explanation on the non-refoulement principle. It made recommendations. 48. Chile valued the important progress made regarding the protection of the rights of women and children, highlighting the third National Plan for Equality Citizenship and Gender, the third Plan against Domestic Violence, the Initiative for Infant Care and Adolescence, and the first National Plan against Human Trafficking. Chile welcomed the legislation to prohibit corporal punishment of children. Chile made recommendations. 49. The Libyan Arab Jamahiriya noted that the task of the High Commission for Immigration and Intercultural Dialogue was important key to fighting discrimination. It stated that States must ensure a society where all the cultures and diversity are priority. It welcomed measures taken for gender equality and the protection of children and young people, urging continued efforts in this regard. It made recommendations. 50. France welcomed the decline in domestic violence cases, despite it being a matter of concern, and asked about measures adopted to remedy the situation. France welcomed the 2007 signature of the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance (CED), asking when Portugal would ratify it. France made recommendations. 51. Spain welcomed Portugal’s decision to ratify CED. Spain invited Portugal to continue raising awareness about all forms of domestic violence against women and children. Spain enquired about the work of the Observatory of Trafficking of Persons and about measures in place to report cases of violence against children. Noting that Portugal had been at the forefront of linking human rights and poverty, Spain enquired about measures undertaken in this area. Spain made recommendations. 52. In its response, Portugal noted the 2009 report of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development confirming the enrolment of more students in school and improvements in education outcomes in 2006–2007. Portugal adopted significant measures to support families in the education of their children, including the extension of the compulsory schooling to ages from 5–18 along with reinforcing the public pre-school network and developing the upper-secondary vocational path. 53. Portugal informed that the High Commission for Integration and Intercultural Dialogue was a public institute established in 2007. Its mission was to promote immigrant integration and to combat all forms of discrimination based on race, colour, nationality, ethnic origin or religion through dialogue and integration process. Regarding the promotion of intercultural dialogue at the local level, attention was drawn that the national support immigrant centres and the local support immigrant offices provide information and support free of charge in an integrated way to immigrants. 54. Portugal highlighted that the phenomenon of children living on the streets had been gradually losing its expression. A non-governmental organization with public funding had specialized in providing assistance to street children focusing its activities on disadvantaged neighbourhoods. In 2008 it identified 17 children living in poverty, 10 engaged in child prostitution and supported 34 children on the run. 55. Portugal noted that there was a considerable investment in the human and financial resources for the Commission for Immigration and Gender Equality and for the promotion of gender equality. 56. Portugal noted that the Parity Law adopted in 2006 established states that any list of three or more candidates for Parliament, the European Parliament and for local authorities must ensure minimum participation of 33 per cent of each sex. The law has been fully applied for the first time to the local, national and the European elections that took place this year and produced effects in increasing the number of women elected. The Commission for Immigration and Gender Equality will launch a study to assess the degree of the implementation of law in order for the Parliament to evaluate the impact of this law in 2011. 57. Portugal had set up an action plan for immigrant integration for 2007–2009 with a holistic approach based on the participation of 13 different ministries. The plan was publicly discussed and civil society, including immigrants associations, was highly mobilized. One of the priority areas of this plan was on employment and professional training particularly the integration challenge. 58. Portugal noted that the Roma had access to important set of general programmes and measures aimed at individuals and groups living in situations of poverty and exclusion. These included the Integration Social Income, housing programmes, measures for social protection and school social action. Additional measures specially aimed at the integration of the Roma communities included a pilot project encompassing the creation of 15 Roma municipal mediators so that they could establish close relations with local services and organizations and local Roma communities.  59. Although the budget for the national mechanism for gender equality had been slightly reduced, the budgets for financing the initiatives of civil society, including non.governmental organizations working for gender equality and building citizenship and non.discrimination based on the grounds of sex were strongly increased for 2007–2013 (83 million Euros) 60. Portugal stated that protection of the rights of migrant workers was fundamental and such rights were already protected in the legal system. The fact that Portugal did not ratify the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families did not hamper in any way the rights of migrants in need of protection as most of the rights were already covered by other international covenants and the European Convention of Human Rights that Portugal is a party to. Portugal emphasized that Portuguese law guaranteed the basic human rights of all migrant workers and the members of their families regardless of their status such as access to health, services and education. 61. Portugal noted that the resolution by the Parliament reinforced the national strategy for social protection and social inclusion for 2008–2010 by acknowledging the need for permanent monitoring of poverty in Portugal and for defining the poverty thresholds. 62. Portugal noted that racial discrimination was a crime and that racial hostility was also an aggravating circumstance for certain crimes and could also be taken into account in the determination of the measures of penalty. 63. Referring to the programme of action to eliminate female genital mutilation, the Russian Federation asked about the seriousness of the problem. It asked why most of Portugal’s periodic reports to treaty bodies were late and why Portugal had only replied to 4 out of 15 questionnaires sent by the Special Procedures. It noted the persistence of human trafficking, despite significant efforts to prevent it. It made a recommendation. 64. Austria welcomed legislative initiatives to overcome discrimination against women, and asked about the implementation of the action plan against domestic violence 2007– 2010. While welcoming recent reforms in the field of criminal law, Austria expressed concern on reports of ill-treatment of prisoners by security guards, enquiring about the follow-up to the recommendations of the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment in this regard. Austria made recommendations.  65. Bosnia and Herzegovina commended on consultations made during the preparatory process, especially with civil society. It noted challenges faced by the Portuguese penitentiary system, asking whether investigations of cases of abuses and ill-treatment of prisoners had been carried out and those responsible for the abuses had been brought to justice. Concerning the racist aspects of some offences and the insufficient attention of the police and prosecutors, it asked whether Portugal considered the possibility to work on the training and capacity-building of judges, prosecutors and police staff on human rights and whether Portugal was taking appropriate steps to raise public awareness of human rights. It made a recommendation. 66. The United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland welcomed the Government’s commitment to working towards the ratification of OP-CAT and to improving prison conditions, asking about developments in these areas. It welcomed the Plan for Integration of Immigrants and the revision of the Criminal Code in 2007. It requested further information on challenges faced to ensure the full integration of all ethnic groups. It made recommendations. 67. Japan commended on policy-making efforts and special measures for ethnic minorities, foreigners and immigrants, and enquired about planned measures to resolve prejudice and discrimination against immigrants and the Roma. Japan noted that gaps remained for working women and asked about planned policies in this area. Regarding police-related violence, Japan enquired about efforts to address it, including ensuring that police officers and others are familiar with international human right standards. Japan made a recommendation. 68. Sweden referred to the issues regarding the conditions in Portuguese prisons and the excessive use of force by law enforcement officials. Sweden raised the issue of high number of deaths among women due to domestic violence. Sweden further asked about the continuing practice of corporal punishment within the family. Sweden made recommendations. 69. Angola noted with satisfaction the approval of a plan for the integration of immigrants. Angola noted the efforts made to combat marital (domestic) violence, asking about additional measures being implemented in this area. Angola enquired about strategies to motivate and integrate children from minorities into the school system. Angola made recommendations.  70. Australia welcomed the ratification of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and its Optional Protocol and the launching of the programme of action to eliminate female genital mutilation, and the 2007 revision of the Criminal Code, which made domestic violence an “autonomous and typified crime” punishable by 1 to 5 years of imprisonment. Australia noted the recommendations of the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination and the Human Rights Committee to intensify its efforts to integrate Roma communities and promote opportunities for the full enjoyment of their social, economic and cultural rights. Australia made a recommendation. 71. Ukraine welcomed efforts aimed at combating trafficking in human beings, including the 2007–2010 National Plan against Trafficking in Human Beings and the criminal investigations and punishment of the crime of trafficking. Ukraine commended on its cooperation with the civil society and welcomed the awareness-raising campaign to combat the problem of trafficking. Ukraine noted with satisfaction that Portugal’s immigration policy was coupled with an integration policy. Ukraine made recommendations. 72. The United States of America raised questions concerning the overcrowding conditions in prisons and detention centres, and the completion of investigations of deaths in custody. It asked how Portugal addressed the physical abuse of inmates by prison guards in the implementation of the 2004 guidelines and law to reform prisons. It acknowledged the establishment of a Plan for the Elimination of Exploitation of Child Labour in 2004, enquiring about measures taken to reduce the number of working children in urban informal sectors. It made recommendations. 73. While commending Portugal’s efforts to achieve gender equality and the advancement of women, the Republic of Korea noted concerns regarding domestic violence against women and girls. It also noted that they were still exposed to discrimination and human trafficking, asking about measures to address these issues. It noted reports of ill-treatment and discriminatory conduct by law enforcement officials against vulnerable groups, such as immigrants, refugees and ethnic minorities. It made recommendations. 74. Norway asked about plans to include civil society actors in the follow-up process to the universal periodic review. Norway welcomed the third National Plan against Domestic Violence and the 2007 revision of the Criminal Code, while noting that challenges still existed. Norway noted the high number of deaths among women due to domestic violence and expressed concern on the increasing number of women and children reporting domestic violence. Norway noted that women within the Roma minority were particularly vulnerable. Norway welcomed measures taken to improve the situation in local prisons, while expressing concern about the number of reports of cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment in penitentiaries. Norway made recommendations. 75. Argentina noted the discrimination against vulnerable groups, including some Roma women seeking asylum and migrants, the disproportionate use of force by the police, and child prostitution and child pornography. Argentina made recommendations. 76. Mauritius appreciated insightful explanations on the issue of domestic violence and violence against women. Mauritius made recommendations regarding the ratification of OP-CAT and the situation relating to racial discrimination against specific groups of people. 77. Bulgaria noted Portugal’s institutional framework to protect the human rights and fundamental freedoms of all citizens. Bulgaria appreciated the special emphasis placed on violence against women, particularly domestic violence. Bulgaria made a recommendation. 78. Nigeria noted Portugal’s awareness of reports that immigrants and ethnic minorities suffer racial discrimination in access to employment, wages, shops, housing, and healthcare, requesting information on how the Government tackles this phenomenon. Nigeria welcomed efforts in dealing with the increased number of migrants since the 1990s, while expressing concern on complaints of inappropriate reception by officers of the Foreigners and Borders Service and delays in processing their cases. Nigeria made recommendations. 79. Ghana commended on the inclusion of a gender perspective in measures taken to strengthen the enjoyment of economic, social and cultural rights, and efforts to include the participation of immigrants in the development of immigration policies. Ghana noted complaints of racial discrimination against immigrants and ethnic minorities in access to employment, wage equality, access to loans, housing and health care. Ghana made recommendations.  80. South Africa noted that the justiciability of economic, social and cultural rights was recognized and the strategies to ensure enjoyment of these rights. It enquired about plans aimed at facilitating better access to social services by the Roma. It asked whether foreign workers were still excluded from vocational training and about future plans in this regard. It enquired about the availability of national plans to implement CRC. 81. Morocco welcomed the creation of an Inter-Ministerial Working Group and considered the commitment for the follow-up to this review as a good practice. Morocco noted the direct applicability of the international instruments ratified in Portugal. Morocco welcomed the human rights education and awareness raising programmes, particularly within the educational system, requesting more information about them, particularly on the cultural dimension within human rights education. Morocco made recommendations. 82. Bangladesh praised Portugal’s openness for managed migration. Bangladesh expressed concerns regarding the ill-treatment of migrants by the law enforcing officials, and on the discrimination and ill-treatment against the Roma community that continue to suffer from prejudice and discrimination. Bangladesh noted concerns about the existence and extent of human trafficking, particularly regarding women for the purposes of economic and sexual exploitation. Bangladesh made recommendations. 83. Portugal informed that one of the main aims of the criminal reform in 2007 was to broaden the scope of alternative sentences to imprisonment. Alternative measures have since proven to be effective and secure serving the purposes of criminal justice system on repression and reintegration. 84. Portugal noted the training school for judges and prosecutors that included a general curriculum on human rights issues and the special mandatory training for judges and prosecutors on criminal law, discrimination and domestic violence. Human Rights and Law Enforcement — an OHCHR human rights training manual for the police — had been translated into Portuguese and used. 85. Portugal noted that all prisoners had access to sanitary installations at all times inside their cells. Very few allegations of ill-treatment in prisons were recognized by the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture. If there was an allegation, it shall be investigated and those responsible were subject to punishments, both disciplinary and criminal penalty. A new law on the enforcement of sentences approved in September 2008 included the possibility to make an appeal to a judge from any decisions made from the prison director. 86. With regard to raising awareness for fighting gender stereotype in the media, Portugal noted that the CIG works to create an enabling environment for equality also by promoting balanced and non-stereotyped images of women and men. 87. Portugal noted that the first Plan of Action for the Integration of Persons with Disabilities together with several specific action plans, namely the national plan to promote accessibility in articulation with the adoption of legislation for accessibility in terms of physical spaces and housing, aimed to improve the living quality of persons with disabilities, and to ensure access to the generally available goods to allow their full participation in society. 88. Portugal informed that there was growing awareness on female genital mutilation, which has led to the criminalization of this practice and the adoption of a specific plan in 2009 aimed to prevent female genital mutilation through awareness raising, training, and support for women and girls who are subject to it. 89. Portugal informed that in 2007 the Government launched the Initiative for Childhood and Adolescence, a comprehensive approach to the rights of the child set out in CRC. The initiative of 2009–2010 is a comprehensive action plan to defend the universality of the rights of the child aimed at reinforcing cooperation and articulation between institutions and civil society organizations responsible for and concerned with the protection of the rights of the child. 90. Portugal informed that the Criminal Code criminalized various conducts encompassing crimes of sexual exploitation, sexual abuse and child pornography. The Portuguese judiciary police have celebrated a protocol, in 2007, with the Ministry of Education for the prevention of sexual crimes against minors committed in the context of new information technologies and telecommunications.  91. Portugal noted that there had been an extremely positive development in reducing child labour. The number of children performing illegal work was merely residual. This result was mainly due to the work carried out by the plan for the elimination of exploitation of child labour since 2002. 92. Portugal noted the new legal framework introduced in 2004 to achieve inclusive schooling guaranteeing the quality education and principal values and fundamental tools to ensure equal opportunities for all. The Ministry of Education had put in place an action plan to help support non-native students enrolled in Portuguese schools aiming at their full integration into the education system. “Choices Programme” is a governmental programme managed and coordinated by the High Commission for Immigration and Intercultural Dialogue which targeted children and young people between the ages of 6 and 24 from disadvantaged social background, many of which are immigrant descents and members of ethnic minorities, notably the Roma community in order to promote their social integration. 93. Portugal informed that as additional measures to protect women victims of domestic violence, it had started experimental prevention programmes to avoid repeated offending by the aggressors. Experimental programmes on the use of electronic means of surveillance on perpetrators of domestic violence had also been launched and a 24 hours telephone line to assist victims of domestic violence was being prepared. The possibility of filing an electronic complaint had already led to 14600 complaints in the first semester of 2009, 12 percent more than in the same period of 2008. The shelter networks had currently 36 shelters, which had in 2008 an occupancy rate of 87 percent (659 women and 784 children). 94 Portugal noted the mandatory reporting system for professionals working with children that detect the use of corporal punishment in the family. Furthermore, any citizen aware of situations of abuse can report them to the competent institutions within the field of infancy and youth. Reporting is mandatory in cases where physical and psychological integrity of a child or juvenile is endangered. It also noted an additional measure, the creation of proximity and victims support teams in the security forces to protect especially vulnerable victims. 95. Portugal informed that there were no extreme right political parties with parliamentary representation. A member of the extreme right party was convicted for discriminatory acts under article 240 of the Criminal Code. 96. Portugal consulted civil society for the preparation of its national report which proved to be very useful exercise in identifying best practices and challenges and it intended to involve civil society organizations in the follow-up process, which would be built upon the recommendations of the present review. 97. Portugal informed that it undertook important efforts in the area of human rights information, education, and training. The public can have free online access to the human rights conventions that Portugal had ratified. One specific section was devoted to the United Nations treaty bodies, which contains the full texts of all reports submitted by Portugal. Portugal had also been publishing and making available online a wide range of human rights publications in Portuguese. 98. Portugal noted that the proposed national human rights commission would contribute to improve its cooperation with international human rights machinery, including the reporting function to the treaty bodies. In order to finalise the overdue reports an inter.ministerial working group had been meeting regularly and Portugal will be able to present the reports in the first semester of 2010. 99. Portugal noted that it had participated in and supported the negotiations on CED and signed it in 2007. The process of ratification had been initiated and expected to be concluded by 2010. 100. Portugal indicated perceives the universal periodic review as an ongoing process. The report of the Working Group would be translated into Portuguese and disseminated within its national institutions. The Government will seek partnership with Parliament and civil society organizations in this endeavour. Portugal further stated that it will submit annual updates on the implementation of the review recommendations.  II. Conclusions and/or recommendations 101. The following recommendations listed below enjoy the support of Portugal: 1. Become a party to the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (Argentina); 2. Consider ratifying the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (Mauritius); ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Czech Republic, Spain); ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment as soon as possible (France); ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment in the near future (United Kingdom); 3. Begin a national consultation process with governmental and non.governmental actors on the most appropriate national preventive mechanism (United Kingdom); Begin a national consultation process with governmental and non.governmental actors on the most appropriate national preventive mechanism and establish its national preventive mechanism accordingly (Czech Republic); Begin a national consultation process with governmental and non.governmental actors on the most appropriate national preventive mechanism and set up an independent national mechanism for the monitoring of detention facilities, which complies with the criteria laid down in the same protocol (France); 4. Ratify the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance (Argentina, Japan); Ratify the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance as soon as possible (France); 5. Develop new plans to ensure that persons with disabilities can exercise their rights on an equal basis under the Action Plan for the Integration of Disabled Persons 2006–2009 (Canada); 6. Continue efforts to raise public awareness of human rights and effectively combat racism, racial discrimination and intolerance (Azerbaijan); 7. Intensify its efforts to create a culture of tolerance in society through, inter alia, the use of public and private media (Bangladesh); 8. Strengthen efforts and measures to counter the dissemination of racist, xenophobic and anti-Semitic propaganda, which generate incitement to racial hatred (Mauritius); 9. Closely monitor developments relating to extreme right and racist movements, including skinhead groups, and reinforce efforts to counter the dissemination of racist and xenophobic propaganda by a section of the population through the Internet (Nigeria); 10. Strengthen measures aimed at combating racial profiling and discriminatory practices towards racial/ethnic minorities and immigrants, particularly by police and border control authorities (Brazil); 11. Continue efforts to strengthen a culture of tolerance to eliminate all forms of discrimination against vulnerable groups (India); 12. Intensify efforts to strengthen programmes, projects and other measures to prevent discrimination against vulnerable groups, including some Roma women, asylum-seekers and migrants (Argentina);  13. Undertake a comprehensive set of measures to tackle racism and racial discrimination and to combat more resolutely all its forms and manifestations (Islamic Republic of Iran); 14. Continue strengthening efforts to ensure respect for the right to non.discrimination of children in the country, in particular children and families living in poverty and children of minority groups, including the Roma (Malaysia); 15. Strengthen efforts to prevent, combat and punish violence against women (Brazil); 16. Consider strengthening efforts to combat violence against women, including domestic violence and trafficking in women and children, by, inter alia, ensuring the full implementation of related laws and legislation (Malaysia); 17. Strengthen its efforts to ensure that the laws prohibiting violence against women and children are enforced (Sweden); 18. Enhance efforts to combat domestic violence (Philippines); 19. Ensure effective implementation of its programmes and policies against domestic violence, inter alia, through the continued provision of adequate funding and the creation of a monitoring mechanism (Austria); 20. Implement educational measures from early childhood rejecting all types of domestic violence and promote the reporting of cases of domestic violence (Spain); 21. Set up strategies and establish mechanisms which encourage victims of marital violence to denounce their aggressors before the judicial authorities (Angola); 22. Provide special training to police officers and prosecutors dealing with cases of sexual and domestic violence against women (Austria); 23. Disseminate information on the available remedies and expand its training programmes for judiciary and public officials to sensitize them to all forms of violence against women and measures to protect victims (Slovenia);  24. Establish mechanisms to disseminate information about the consequences of acts of violence against children (Angola); 25. Continue to build up comprehensive efforts aimed at eliminating trafficking in persons, both at the national and international levels (Belarus); 26. Take measures to improve the efficiency of existing legislation in the area of trafficking in persons (Italy); 27. Strengthen efforts to prevent and punish the crimes of child prostitution, pedophilia and child pornography (Argentina); 28. Continue and strengthen the efforts of the Government to ensure that law enforcement officials and prison guards do not use excessive force or mistreat inmates, by conducting thorough investigations into all such allegations and ensuring that perpetrators are brought to justice (Sweden);  29. Adopt further measures to provide police, prison and judicial staff with human rights training with specific focus on protection of human rights of women, children, ethnic or national minorities as well as of persons of minority sexual orientation or gender identity and strengthen the accountability of such personnel for their proper conduct, particularly when dealing with cases of hate crimes (Czech Republic); 30. Encourage the Government to ensure prompt and independent investigations and accountability for any violations of human rights as well as adequate compensation for the victims thereof (Republic of Korea); 31. Further increase its efforts to ensure prompt, thorough and impartial investigations into all allegations of ill-treatment or excessive use of force by law enforcement officials, in order to bring those responsible for such acts to justice (Norway); 32. Strengthen human rights training programmes for the different categories of police staff and ensure that all cases of excessive use of force are promptly investigated (Italy);  33. Provide better health provisions in prisons (Sweden);  34. Continue the implementation of plans to reduce schools desertion rates, particularly at the secondary level (Chile); 35. Improve effective access to education for children with disabilities (Czech Republic); 36. Take into account the situation and special needs of the Roma and migrants in the elaboration and implementation of all programmes and projects aimed at improving living conditions and the opportunities of the population in general (Cuba); 37. Seek to ensure effective participation of the Roma in the process of ensuring their equal and non-discriminatory treatment (Finland); 38. Continue to take measures to improve the socio-economic and educational situation of the Roma in order to enable them to emerge from social exclusion and marginalization (Ghana); 39. Develop a comprehensive strategy to effectively improve the situation of the Roma community in areas such as housing, education, employment and health care (Islamic Republic of Iran);  40. Intensify its efforts to expand and strengthen the training of law enforcement officials and to enhance public awareness in relation to respect for the human rights and fundamental freedoms of immigrants, refugees and ethnic minorities (Republic of Korea); 41. Continue efforts to promote the integration of immigrants in Portugal (Ukraine); 42. In line with its commitment to the human rights of migrants, implement or strengthen existing measures to prevent and sanction acts of discrimination against migrants (Mexico); 43. Remove the bureaucratic obstacles to rendering prompt assistance to immigrants (Nigeria); 44. Share its experiences in promoting human rights education with other countries (Philippines); 45. Continue its efforts to promote human rights at the international level, particularly in the field of the right to education, and continue to integrate human rights education and training in these efforts (Morocco); 46. Share at the international level its national experience as well as the different initiatives it has taken in the field of human rights education (Morocco); 47. Further address the human rights challenges, strengthen the mechanisms and take appropriate measures to reduce the level of domestic violence, increase the representation of women in the decision-making bodies and provide human rights training for target groups like jurists, police, migrants, minority groups and media as a means of human rights promotion (Bosnia and Herzegovina); 48. Continue the role it plays in multilateral fora in support of the promotion and protection of economic, social and cultural rights (Egypt); 49. Establish an effective and inclusive process to follow up on the recommendations of the Working Group (Norway); 50. Facilitate the active involvement of civil society stakeholders, including human rights non-governmental organizations, in the follow-up to this review (United Kingdom). 102. The following recommendations enjoy the support of Portugal, which considers that the recommendations below are either already implemented or in the process of implementation: 1. Take more concrete steps to improve the situation of persons with disabilities and ratify the International Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (Islamic Republic of Iran); ratify the International Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (Chile); ratify the International Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities as early as possible (China);  2. Ensure the full implementation of all rights enshrined in the Constitution and in the existing legislation (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya); 3. Take concrete steps towards the establishment of a national human rights institution in conformity with the Paris Principles (Egypt);c onsider establishing a separate national human rights institution at the very earliest (India); respect the Paris Principles and put in place national mechanisms and institutions to monitor and follow up on the implementation of its international obligations (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya); intensify (Malaysia)/strengthen (Mexico) efforts to implement its express commitment to establish a national human rights institution in accordance with the Paris Principles; 4. Develop a comprehensive national strategy soon on the implementation of the Convention on the Rights of the Child, as highlighted by the Committee on the Rights of the Child (Islamic Republic of Iran); 5. Undertake to study the underlying causes of the street children phenomenon, including the scope of the problem, and consider developing comprehensive measures to address those causes (Malaysia); take all necessary measures to prevent children from living on the streets and protecting them against child labour and other risks they are exposed to (Netherlands); 6. Strengthen cooperation with human rights mechanisms, particularly treaty bodies (Chile); extend the implementation of the recommendations issued by United Nations treaty bodies and by the Human Rights Council (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya); regularly and in due time deliver reports to the respective treaty bodies regarding the implementation of conventions and optional protocols to which Portugal is a party (Slovenia); 7. Take measures to address the problem of discrimination and racially motivated acts (Ghana); 8. Closely monitor the situation relating to direct or indirect racial discrimination and ensure that complaints in this area are duly dealt with in the most effective manner possible (Mauritius);  9. Introduce appropriate law to prohibit racially motivated activities and to punish perpetrators of such acts, including law enforcement agents (Bangladesh); 10. Continue and strengthen efforts carried out by the High Commission for Immigration and Intercultural Dialogue, particularly efforts to raise awareness of the need to combat racism, discrimination and intolerance (Brazil); 11. Eliminate all forms of discrimination against the Roma, migrants and asylum-seekers and ensure equal opportunities for the enjoyment of their economic, social and cultural rights (Bangladesh); 12. Continue enforcing measures to reduce violence against women (Chile); 13. Continue to combat domestic violence with a policy of prevention as a priority for its Government programme for 2009–2013 (Canada);  14. Facilitate prosecution of domestic violence and implement improved measures for protection of victims (Sweden); 15. Establish a system for clear registration of victims of trafficking in persons and spare no efforts to combat this evil (Russian Federation); 16. Evaluate measures taken with regard to the action plan concerning combating human trafficking and share its experiences and best practices with the international community (Netherlands); 17. Enhance efforts to provide appropriate assistance to victims of human trafficking and utilize the OHCHR Recommended Principles and Guidelines on Human Rights and Human Trafficking as a reference (Philippines); 18. Ensure a clear definition in the law on internal security of appropriate and proportionate use of force by law enforcement officials in line with international standards (Norway); 19. Adopt further measures to ensure the protection of the human rights of the children of persons in detention or prison (Czech Republic); 20. Follow up on its commitment to modernize the justice system and the prison system to address reports of ill-treatment of prisoners (Canada); 21. Strengthen the integration of migrants through increased dialogue at the local level (Angola). 103. The following recommendations will be examined by Portugal, which will provide responses in due time. The response of Portugal to these recommendations will be included in the outcome report to be adopted by the Human Rights Council at its thirteenth session: 1. Develop a national human rights plan in accordance with the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action (Islamic Republic of Iran); 2. Have the Ministry of Labour and Social Solidarity examine further measures to prevent unlawful child labour, including the possibility of sector-specific enforcement policies that target vulnerable populations, such as Roma street children (United States);  3. Extend policies and strategies of gender equality to all levels of the public administration, including affirmative measures for women in all ministries (Spain); 4. Collect and generate disaggregated data on actual manifestations of racism and discrimination with a view to evaluating the situation regarding different racial, ethnic and minority groups (Brazil); 5. Continue the full implementation of legislation regarding violence against women and prosecute and sanction those responsible for such acts in line with the recommendation made by the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women (Bulgaria); maintain and intensify the full implementation of legislation regarding violence against women and prosecute and sanction those responsible for such acts in line with the recommendation made by the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women (Mauritius); maintain and intensify efforts and ensure the full implementation of legislation regarding violence against women and prosecute and sanction those responsible for such acts in line with the recommendation made by the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women (France); 6. Strengthen its efforts to fully implement legislation on violence against women and children and prosecution and convictions of perpetrators and to ensure that all programmes, projects and measures to combat violence against women also reach Roma women (Norway); 7. Continue efforts to combat trafficking in human beings and prosecute traffickers (Ukraine); 8. Strengthen measures to prevent the disproportionate use of force by the police through the incorporation of representatives of ethnic minorities in the security forces and to punish such acts (Argentina);  9. Take further measures to improve the situation in prisons, to provide human rights training to prison personnel and to effectively investigate and prosecute all cases of alleged violence against prisoners (Austria); 10. Implement the 2004 guidelines and reforms in the prison system in Portugal and resolve the serious problems in prisons in an expeditious manner (United States); 11. Continue efforts in relation to the reform of the penal code aimed at reducing the duration of preventive detention and to limit its use in conformity with the principle of presumption of innocence (Mexico);  12. Take additional measures notably in the areas of housing, employment, education and access to social services, particularly to benefit the Roma (Algeria); 13. Implement additional specific measures with a view to the total eradication of the phenomenon of street children and to ensure conditions for their full enjoyment of all human rights, particularly with regard to health, education, housing, food and others (Cuba); 14. Prepare, in consultation with concerned communities, a national strategy to ensure better integration of the Roma in society (Belgium); 15. Take appropriate measures to improve the relations between law enforcement officials and the Roma to prevent the risk of excessive violence by law enforcement officials, notably through the establishment of an independent institution responsible for supervising the acts of the police (Belgium); 16. Strengthen its efforts to integrate Roma communities through positive action in the area of housing, employment, education and social services (Australia); 17. Continue efforts to promote and protect rights of minorities, especially with regard to the Roma (Netherlands). 104. The following recommendations did not enjoy the support of Portugal:  1. Sign and ratify the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families (Egypt); consider ratifying the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families (Algeria, Nigeria, Philippines); ratify the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families (Argentina); ratify the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families as a way of allowing immigrants to enjoy all of the rights provided for in this international legal instrument (Algeria); ratify the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families and hold national consultations in this regard (Philippines). 105. All conclusions and/or recommendations contained in the present report reflect the position of the submitting State(s) and/or the State under review. They should not be construed as endorsed by the Working Group as a whole. Annex Composition of the delegation The delegation of Portugal was headed by H.E. Mr. Pedro LOURTIE, Secretary of State for European Affairs and H.E. Mr. José CONDE RODRIGUES, Secretary of State for Internal Affairs and composed of 22 members: • H.E. Ambassador Francisco XAVIER ESTEVES, Permanent Representative, Geneva • Mr. Miguel SERPA SOARES, Director, Department of Legal Affairs, Ministry of Foreign Affairs • Mr. Rui MACIEIRA, Deputy Director-General, Ministry of Foreign Affairs • Mr. Ricardo PRACANA, Deputy Permanent Representative, Geneva • Ms. Joana GOMES FERREIRA, Director, Office of Documentation and Comparative Law, Prosecutor General’s Office • Ms. Mariana SOTTOMAIOR, Director-General, Ministry of Internal Administration • Mr. Manuel ALBANO, Vice-President of the Commission for Citizenship and Gender Equality • Ms. Sara MARTINS, Director for International Political Organizations, Ministry of Foreign Affairs • Ms. Maria José MATOS, Director of Prison Services, Ministry of Justice • Ms. Fernanda ESTEVEZ, Director of Division, Ministry of Labour and Social Solidarity • Ms. Isabel ROMÃO, Director of International Relations, Commission of Citizenship and Gender Equality • Mr. Pedro RODRIGUES DA SILVA, Counsellor, Permanent Mission, Geneva; • Mr. Luis TAVARES, Counsellor, Permanent Mission, Geneva • Mr. Odete SEVERINO, Head of Division, Department of Strategy and Planning, Ministry of Labour and Social Solidarity • Ms. Maria da Conceição GUEDES DE SOUSA, Head of Division, Ministry of Labour and Social Solidarity • Mr. António DELICADO, Coordinator, Directorate-General of Judiciary Police, Ministry of Justice • Mr. Jorge ARANDA, Adviser of H.E. the Secretary of State for European Affairs, • Mr. Afonso SALES, Police Inspector, Judiciary Police; • Ms. Ana BRITO MANEIRA, First Secretary, Permanent Mission, Geneva • Ms. Carla CASTELO, Division for Human Rights, Ministry of Foreign Affairs • Mr. Vasco MALTA, High Commission for Immigration and Intercultural Dialogue • Ms. Sandra ALVES, Senior Advisor, Ministry of Labour and Social Solidarity 