Distr.: General 16 June 2010 Original: English General Assembly Human Rights Council Fifteenth session Agenda item 6 Universal Periodic Review Report of the Working Group on the UniversalPeriodic Review* Sweden * Previously issued under document symbol A/HRC/WG.6/8/L.10.  The annex to the present report is circulated as received. Contents Paragraphs Page Introduction............................................................................................................. 1–4 3 
I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process................................................ 5–94 3 
A. Presentation by the State under review........................................................... 5–20 3 
B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review........................ 21–94 5 
II. Conclusions and/or recommendations..................................................................... 95–98 12  Annex Composition of the delegation ......................................................................................................... 24 Introduction 1. The Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review, established in accordance with Human Rights Council resolution 5/1, held its eighth session from 3 to 14 May 2010. The review of Sweden was held at the 10th meeting, on 7 May 2010. The delegation of Sweden was headed by the State Secretary, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Frank Belfrage. At its 14th meeting, held on 11 May 2010, the Working Group adopted the report on Sweden. 2. On 7 September 2009, the Human Rights Council selected the following group of rapporteurs (troika) to facilitate the review of Sweden: Mauritius, Ukraine and Uruguay. 3. In accordance with paragraph 15 of the annex to resolution 5/1, the following documents were issued for the review of Sweden: (a) A national report submitted/written presentation made in accordance with paragraph 15 (a) (A/HRC/WG.6/8/SWE/1);   (b) A compilation prepared by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) in accordance with paragraph 15 (b) (A/HRC/WG.6/8/SWE/2); (c) A summary prepared by OHCHR in accordance with paragraph 15 (c) (A/HRC/WG.6/8/SWE/3).  4. A list of questions prepared in advance by Algeria, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Germany, the Netherlands, Norway, Slovenia, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and Switzerland was transmitted to Sweden through the troika. Those questions are available on the extranet of the universal periodic review. I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process A. Presentation by the State under review 5. The Swedish delegation stated that the promotion and respect of human rights was a priority for Sweden and a cornerstone of country’s foreign policy. 6. The preparation of the national report had been transparent and inclusive. Sweden was a parliamentary democracy founded on the rule of law. Sweden was a party to many human rights treaties and had accepted the most far-reaching scrutiny of its human rights record. The Swedish general welfare system was extensive and had contributed to the practical enjoyment of economic, social and cultural rights. 7. Sweden had five national minorities: the Jews, the Roma, the Sami, the Swedish Finns and the Tornedalers. In 1977, the Sami had been recognized by Parliament as Sweden’s only indigenous people. Migration had contributed to the shaping of a multicultural society.  8. Sweden was committed to respecting human rights, while acknowledging the challenges facing it. 9. The Penal Code provided for aggravated sentencing for crimes motivated by hatred. Measures taken include training for police and prosecutors, new manuals, the establishment of a special hate crimes unit and a hate crimes telephone hotline. The police monitored organizations engaged in racist activities. Another tool for fighting prejudice was the provision of State funding to non-governmental organizations.   10. Freedom of expression, freedom of the press and freedom of religion were enshrined in the Constitution. Censorship of written media had been prohibited since 1949. According to the Freedom of the Press Act, interventions against the contents of publications were allowed regarding cases of incitement to racial hatred.  11. The fight against discrimination was a priority. The most recent initiative was the new Discrimination Act, which reinforced monitoring and included two new grounds of discrimination, age and transgender identity or expression. The Act had introduced protection in areas not previously covered, such as discrimination in the public sector.  12. Sweden remained committed to the fight against torture and was a party to the most far-reaching supervisory mechanisms. Sweden had received visits from both the Subcommittee on Prevention of Torture and the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture. The crime of torture had been penalized under several provisions in the Penal Code, including aggravated assault. 13. The judicial system was based on the principle of free examination of evidence. Procedural safeguards effectively excluded any evidence obtained under torture.  14. The Aliens Act stipulated that refusal of entry to or the expulsion of an alien may never be enforced when there are reasonable grounds for assuming that the alien would be in danger of suffering the death penalty or being subjected to torture or ill treatment.  15. Sweden has a generous migration policy. The recent increase in the number of unaccompanied asylum-seeking children had put reception facilities under considerable strain; however, the Government was consulting with municipalities to address that issue.  16. All asylum-seeking children had the same rights to education and child care, and were entitled to health care on the same footing with other children. A Government inquiry was investigating how the right to subsidized health care could be expanded.  17. The aim of Swedish gender equality policy was to change systems and conditions so that women and men could enjoy the same power and opportunites and were able to influence their own lives. Measures undertaken included an action plan on prostitution and trafficking for sexual purposes and a strategy on gender equality in the labour market.  18. Violence against women, including sexual violence, was still a problem. In 2007, a national action plan was adopted to combat violence perpetrated by men against women, violence and oppression in the name of honour, and violence in same-sex relationships. A law prohibiting the purchase of sexual services was an important tool in preventing trafficking and sexual exploitation. 19. The Sami Parliament had been established in 1993. The Government continued to study the ratification of ILO Convention No. 169, but all possible legal consequences would have to be further clarified. 20. Sweden had adopted two national human rights action plans: one covering the period 2002-2004, and one for 2006-2009. The Government had appointed a Delegation on Human Rights to achieve full respect for human rights. The Delegation would submit its final report in September 2010. In that context, the establishment of an independent national human rights institution would be discussed. B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review 21. During the interactive dialogue, 53 delegations made statements. Additional statements that could not be delivered during the interactive dialogue owing to time constraints will be posted on the extranet of the universal periodic review when available.1 Recommendations made during the dialogue are found in section II of the present report.  22. A number of delegations acknowledged the constructive engagement of the Swedish Government with the universal periodic review mechanism and commended the delegation for the detailed and informed presentation of the report. They also praised Sweden for its human rights record and its commitment to human rights. 23. Switzerland noted the efforts made by Sweden in the area of human rights education and training, and welcomed the new draft law in that regard. Switzerland also noted the issue of the lack of adequate housing and homeless children, pointing out that the lack of data had hampered the implementation of programmes to improve the situation of homeless children. Switzerland made a recommendation.  24. Nicaragua noted Sweden’s high rank in the UNDP Human Development Index. It noted that human rights were a priority for Sweden’s foreign policy and its development cooperation. Nicaragua regretted the conditioning of aid as against the spirit of the Paris Declaration on Aid Efficiency. It encouraged Sweden to assume a belligerent position so that the European Union could be more flexible in commercial negotiations. Nicaragua made recommendations.   25. Belarus was concerned about the increases in racially motivated crimes, racist propaganda and sex tourism, as well as about the situation of unaccompanied migrant children and the lengthy holding of such children in custodial centres. Belarus made recommendations. 26. Greece asked Sweden to share its best practices in the protection of human rights and recognized Sweden’s achievements in promoting women’s rights, stressing that further action could be taken. Greece noted reports of anti-Semitic crimes and that Muslims had been denied employment. It also noted that the rights of the Sami to their traditional lands and natural resources were systematically violated. Greece made recommendations. 27. Algeria welcomed Sweden’s commitment to contribute up to 0.7 per cent of its gross domestic product (GDP) to development assistance. It was concerned about the recent increase in incidents of racism and xenophobia against minorities, refugees, asylum-seekers and migrants, as well as about incidents of Islamophobia. Algeria made recommendations. 28. Brazil commended Sweden for the Anti-Discrimination Act and for establishing a single ombudsman. It noted the increase in hate crimes and asked if they had been prosecuted. It asked whether the new definition of hate crime was being applied by the judiciary. It noted that treaty bodies had expressed concern about the detention of migrants and asylum-seekers. Brazil made recommendations. 29. Canada commended Sweden for establishing a Children’s Ombudsman and ratifying the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. Canada expressed interest in sharing good practices with regard to the integration of migrants and refugees. It noted that both countries shared similar concerns and good practices regarding the situation of indigenous peoples. Canada made recommendations.  1 Kazakhstan, Costa Rica, Kuwait, Burundi, Ecuador, Ghana and Mauritius.  30. Nigeria acknowledged Sweden’s commitment to human rights, emphasizing that it had extended a standing invitation to special procedures. Nigeria welcomed the establishment of the Swedish Aliens Act, which allowed for a new system of appeals and procedures in the field of migration and asylum. Nigeria made recommendations. 31. Djibouti welcomed the adoption of the National Plan on Human Rights and its periodic evaluation. It noted with interest Sweden’s high rank in the Human Development Index. Djibouti referred to the concern of several treaty bodies about the lack of a modality for the domestic implementation of international human rights instruments. Djibouti noted with appreciation that Sweden had made combating discrimination a priority. Djibouti made a recommendation. 32. The Russian Federation acknowledged Sweden’s high level of human rights protection. However, it noted the persistence of discrimination based on ethnicity and gender. It also noted concern regarding the law on screening electronic messages. It also referred to the number of responses to the thematic questionnaires of special procedures. The Russian Federation made recommendations. 33. Pakistan stressed that criminalizing the purchase of sexual services was an important step in combating human trafficking. It requested information about the evaluation of the first action plan on human rights. Pakistan questioned the Swedish approach of including the rights of lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender persons as part of its human rights priorities, as their rights were not universally recognized and this could amount to imposing one set of values on others. Pakistan made recommendations. 34. Qatar acknowledged that democracy and human rights formed the basis of Swedish society and appreciated the welfare system, by which the Government bore most of the costs of social services. Qatar inquired what measures had been taken to prevent discrimination against migrant and refugee women and women of minority backgrounds. Qatar made a recommendation. 35. Portugal noted Sweden’s efforts to combat violence against children and discrimination. It noted that the Special Rapporteur on violence against women had highlighted challenges regarding unequal power relations between women and men, as well as its low prosecution and conviction rates. It asked about the impact of the national action plan to combat violence perpetrated by men against women. Portugal made recommendations. 36. India appreciated Sweden’s welfare system and welcomed progressive measures to enhance human rights education and training. India also noted the Anti-Discrimination Act, the second National Action Plan for Human Rights and the establishment of the Equality Ombudsman, but observed the continued existence of discrimination. India inquired about further steps to combat violence against women. India made a recommendation. 37. The Islamic Republic of Iran noted persistent discrimination against Roma and Sami; increasing numbers of racially motivated hate crimes; high levels of child abuse and neglect and other domestic violence; continued discrimination against immigrants, refugees and minority women; the non-criminalization of torture; the denial of access to facilities to Muslim women; and racist and xenophobic overtones in the public arena and discrimination against Muslims. Iran expressed grave concern at increasing trends of Islamophobia. Iran made recommendations.  38. France noted that Sweden had signed but not yet ratified the Convention on enforced disappearance and requested information about the challenges Sweden might face in that regard. It also pointed out that there was no national human rights institution in conformity with the Paris Principles. France made recommendations. 39. The Czech Republic acknowledged the system of ombudsmen ready to assist in cases of discrimination. It acknowledged Sweden’s systematic work and exemplary cooperation with international mechanisms. The Czech Republic made recommendations.  40. While welcoming the adoption of the second National Action Plan for Human Rights, Romania was interested in learning about its implementation. Romania also noted that there was no independent national human rights institution and asked for updated information in that regard. 41. Finland welcomed the new legislation on minorities and minority languages and asked about how access for minorities to social services could be improved, and how the Delegation for Roma Issues was carrying out its functions. Finland also asked about the benefits of having merged four distinct entities into the Equality Ombudsman. Finland made recommendations. 42. Egypt noted the adoption of Sweden’s second National Action Plan for Human Rights, with its main focus on discrimination, and the new Anti-Discrimination Act. However, Egypt echoed the concerns expressed by treaty bodies regarding the increase in racially motivated crimes and the low number of prosecutions. Egypt also inquired about measures taken to combat the trafficking in women and children. Egypt made recommendations. 43. Cuba expressed concerns about racial hatred crimes, the dissemination of racist propaganda, religious intolerance, the reluctance to prosecute cases of discrimination against minorities, and the excessive use of force against migrants. It was also concerned about discrimination against Sami and Roma children and about the situation of people with disabilities. It regretted the impunity of State agents responsible for the use of Swedish territory as transit territory for secret flights of the Central Intelligence Agency. Cuba made recommendations. 44. Spain highlighted Sweden’s willingness to cooperate with special procedures and its effort to integrate a human rights perspective into its policies. It recognized Sweden’s achievements regarding the integration of migrants. It asked how the national mechanism for follow-up to the implementation of CRPD would work. Spain made recommendations. 45. New Zealand welcomed the new Act on national minorities and minority languages. However, it noted that the land issues of the Sami people had not been resolved and asked questions in that regard. It was concerned about the use of diplomatic assurances and about challenges faced by persons with disabilities. It regretted that Sweden had yet to establish an independent national human rights institution. New Zealand made recommendations. 46. Mexico acknowledged Sweden’s improvements in its human rights normative framework and the institution of the Ombudsman. It noted with satisfaction efforts to ensure the right to health and education for every child, and the information provided regarding the fighting of trafficking. Mexico made recommendations. 47. Bolivia (Plurinational State of) expressed concern about participation by the Sami in political decisions affecting them, especially regarding land issues. It noted that Sweden supported the United Nations Declaration on Indigenous Peoples but had not implemented the rights set out therein and had not ratified ILO Convention No. 169. It asked whether Sweden intended to expropriate indigenous lands to install windmills. It expressed concern about the increase in crimes motivated by racial hate, the propaganda in favour of white supremacy, and the lack of penalties for such crimes. Bolivia made recommendations. 48. Chile commended Sweden for having taken in thousands of Chileans during turbulent times in Chilean history. It praised the ratification of many human rights treaties and the human rights normative framework. It welcomed the adoption of a national plan to combat violence against women and the priority given to combating violence against children. It asked about the implementation of the right to legal assistance. Chile made recommendations. 49. Hungary acknowledged that Sweden had integrated human rights into its foreign policy, including its development assistance. Hungary was particularly interested in the recent adoption of anti-discrimination and equality laws. Hungary drew attention to the concluding observations of the Committee on the Rights of the Child with regard to the education of undocumented children. Hungary made recommendations. 50. South Africa sought clarifications on challenges faced in implementing policies to address discrimination against the Sami. South Africa expressed concern about the increase in racially motivated hate crimes and discrimination and xenophobia towards minority children, as well as child migrants, refugees and asylum-seekers, and asked how Sweden intended to eliminate those scourges. South Africa made recommendations. 51. Germany acknowledged that Sweden had made comprehensive efforts to address the issue of discrimination, including against the Roma and the Sami. Germany commended Sweden for its proactive policy and inquired about its initial experience with the application of the Anti-Discrimination Act. 52. The United States welcomed Sweden’s efforts to ensure respect for the human rights of citizens and immigrants alike. It noted an increase in anti-Muslim, anti-Semitic and homophobic violent crimes and recognized Sweden’s proactive approach to combating human trafficking. The United States made recommendations.  53. The delegation of Sweden proceeded to respond to specific questions that had been raised. Sweden highlighted national action plans and ongoing inquiries regarding its human rights work. A delegation had been formed in 2006 to support the second national action plan and would submit its report in September 2010. The second action plan would also be evaluated. The two inquiries and the universal periodic review recommendations would be important input for Sweden’s reporting to Parliament in 2011. 54. Sweden noted its elaborate network of human rights institutions. The four previous ombudsmen had been accredited by the International Coordinating Committee, but their accreditation status lapsed in November 2008 as a result of their merging. A new application was being prepared by the Equality Ombudsman, the new institution for combating discrimination. When the delegation for human rights delivered its report, the establishment of a national human rights institution that would possibly complement the ombudsman would be considered. 55. Violence against women was a particular challenge and a high priority. The national plan of action provided for measures to support women subjected to violence, targeted violent men, provided attention for children and included special measures to address sexual violence. The plan was being evaluated by the national council for crime prevention. 56. A new strategy on national minorities had been adopted to improve the implementation of relevant conventions. It included measures to promote national minority languages and culture, as well as participation. An administrative board and the Sami Parliament were entrusted with following up on the minority policy. 57. Roma were particularly affected by prejudice. A Delegation for Roma issues had been established in 2007 and mandated to promote and support municipal projects and services to improve the situation of the Roma. The delegation would submit its final report in June 2010. 58. Sweden reiterated that organizations involved in racist activities were breaking the law and were being countered through legislation and the police. 59. A bill had been submitted to Parliament proposing an amendment to the Constitution to give explicit recognition to the Sami. Sami policy promoted self-determination on issues directly affecting them. The Sami Parliament had been given new responsibilities regarding reindeer herding, and in 2006 the Government had submitted a bill on increasing Sami independence. 60. Sweden condemned all incitement to violence or hatred, and provisions concerning hate crimes were stipulated under law. Sweden firmly condemned Islamophobia and anti-Semitism and was committed to combating all forms of racism and intolerance. Threats and harassment against religious congregations were addressed by law enforcement authorities. In Sweden, it was the Chancellor of Justice that handled cases concerning incitement to racial hatred.  61. Freedom of expression was a priority. Nonetheless, it had limitations in international law. Swedish law regulated those limitations, including through the prohibition of agitation against a national or ethnic group. Websites were protected from censorship and prohibitive measures. Notwithstanding, there were mechanisms for prosecuting violators of the right to freedom of expression, employed by the competent public agencies; the Government was constitutionally prohibited from intervening in particular cases. 62. Ensuring children’s rights was also a priority. Sweden was one of the largest contributors to UNICEF and had a clear policy on implementing children’s rights, based on CRC. Those efforts also covered asylum-seeking children and provisions regarding health care, education and the fight against poverty among children. 63. The migration and asylum policy was based on the full realization of human rights. The policy guaranteed long-term sustainability, safeguarded the right to asylum, facilitated cross-border mobility, promoted needs-based labour immigration, supported the positive impact of migration and expanded international cooperation. Measures were being taken to combat the disappearance of unaccompanied asylum-seeking children. 64. Through its implementation of the provisions of the six core human rights instruments, Sweden had already fulfilled most of the principles set out in ICRMW. Migrant workers already enjoyed equal rights with citizens.  65. Sweden had ratified ICRPD and CRPD-OP in 2008. Sweden ensured that its legislation was in line with the Convention. With regard to CED, Sweden had signed it in 2007 and was considering ratification. 66. Sweden noted that it had strict regulations requiring that arms not be exported to countries in armed conflict in which there was a risk of violating humanitarian law. 67. Concerning the Signals Intelligence Act, Sweden noted that there was a legitimate interest in having an efficient tool for collecting intelligence from foreign counties, balanced with the protection of personal integrity and the right to privacy. A special intelligence court had been established to examine requests for carrying out signals intelligence, and a special inspectorate had been established to verify compliance with the Act. Furthermore, the Data Protection Board monitored the agency carrying out such activities. Sweden stressed that its primary interest was in creating a clear legal basis for such activities, which was in conformity with its human rights obligations.  68. Sweden noted that it was not its regular practice to use diplomatic assurances when expelling aliens who had been refused asylum or residence permits. Diplomatic assurances had been used in two cases in 2001, which had been heavily criticised by the Human Rights Committee and the Committee against Torture, and such assurances had not been used since. 69. Sweden stressed that it had not been involved in anything referred to as rendition carried out by the Central Intelligence Agency. 70. Turkey applauded Sweden’s high human rights standards, but noted that efforts were needed to combat discrimination against the Roma, the Sami and migrant communities. Turkey expressed concern at discrimination against persons of non-Swedish background in the judicial and law-enforcement systems. It asked about the Anti-Discrimination Act and measures to combat hate speech. Turkey urged the strengthening of efforts to prevent violence against women and asked about compliance with the Convention against Torture and the establishment of a national human rights institution. 71. Argentina noted the implementation of the second National Plan for Human Rights and a constitutional clause providing that public institutions must combat discrimination. It also noted that the Aliens Act permitted the granting of refugee status to women fleeing gender-based violence and to people fleeing persecution based on sexual orientation. Argentina made recommendations.  72. Botswana commended Sweden for its achievements in gender equality as well as children’s rights. Botswana requested information about the implementation of the 2007 national plan to combat violence against women. Botswana made a recommendation. 73. Malaysia was encouraged by Sweden’s emphasis on economic, social and cultural rights and commended the Government for assuming all or most of the expenditure related to social services. Malaysia was also encouraged by the adoption of the Anti-Discrimination Act, which had led to the establishment of the Equality Ombudsman. Malaysia made recommendations. 74. Austria welcomed efforts to reform policies on national minorities, including with regard to language instruction, and asked about measures implemented under the new Act on National Minorities. Austria expressed concern at continuing discrimination against the Sami. Noting an increase in racially motivated hate crimes, Austria inquired about the reasons for the low number of prosecutions of such crimes. Austria made recommendations. 75. Moldova highlighted Sweden’s inclusion of the human rights pillar among the main thematic priorities of its development cooperation agenda, with a strengthened focus on support for democracy. Moldova inquired about the country’s vision of the future modalities for the implementation of universal periodic review recommendations. Moldova made a recommendation. 76. Colombia noted measures to combat discrimination in all its forms. It noted the adoption of the Anti-Discrimination Law, which promoted protection against discrimination based on sex, ethnic origin, religious or other beliefs, disabilities and sexual orientation. Colombia made recommendations. 77. Jordan noted that Sweden had been at the forefront in promoting gender equality and humanitarian assistance. Jordan also observed that the Sweden had played a vital role in the establishment of the Human Rights Council. Jordan commended Sweden for that contribution and hoped that it would continue to pursue such goals. Jordan made recommendations. 78. Norway noted Sweden’s commitment and its achievements in reducing discrimination and promoting equality. However, Norway pointed out that both the Swedish Ombudsman against discrimination and the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination had referred to discrimination against persons of foreign origin in terms of the labour market, health and access to housing. Norway also noted the slow progress with regard to the Sami people. Norway made recommendations. 79. Bosnia and Herzegovina asked about ratifying ICRMW and about establishing a national institution in accordance with the Paris Principles. It appreciated the methods used in investigating and combating discrimination and welcomed the action plans to combat violence against women and the disappearance of unaccompanied asylum-seeking children. It was concerned that immigrant, refugee and minority women suffered discrimination. It asked about measures to combat racially motivated hate crimes. It made recommendations. 80. The Netherlands commended Sweden for its human rights record, but expressed concern at discrimination against the Sami and the Roma. It welcomed the National Action Plan to combat violence against women.  It noted concerns that the 2008 Surveillance Act might still interfere with the right to privacy. The Netherlands made recommendations. 81. Indonesia commended Sweden’s initiative to establish bilateral dialogues on human rights. It expressed concern at the publication of a poster of Prophet Muhammad and a blasphemous video message by a Swedish political party, which undermined the process of building trust and understanding among cultures. It noted that Sweden had not established a national human rights institution in accordance with the Paris Principles. Indonesia made recommendations. 82. The United Kingdom welcomed Sweden’s efforts to strengthen the legislative framework for protecting human rights and the Act on National Minorities and Minority Languages. It noted the ratification of CRPD in 2008 and asked about improving awareness regarding the rights of the disabled. It welcomed Sweden’s work on children’s rights and the action plan for safeguarding children from sexual exploitation. The United Kingdom made recommendations.  83. The Libyan Arab Jamahiriya inquired how parliamentary ombudsmen exercised control over civil servants who had committed offences and asked about the national monitoring of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, plans to establish a national human rights institution, and measures to combat racism, racial discrimination and xenophobia, in particular Islamophobia. It made a recommendation. 84. According to non-governmental organization information, the rights of the Sami people were not clearly specified in the Constitution, and their right to traditional land and natural resources were not being respected. China asked about measures Sweden would take to address such issues. China noted the establishment of the institution on Roma issues and was interested in how Sweden would ensure the equality of the Roma people. China made a recommendation. 85. Iraq welcomed the implementation of the national strategy to prohibit capital punishment and Sweden’s accession to most international human rights conventions, as well as the establishment of an ombudsman function. Iraq made a recommendation. 86. Philippines noted with appreciation that Sweden allocated more than 0.7 per cent of its GDP to international development assistance and contributed to poverty eradication and the promotion of human rights. Philippines expressed interest in information regarding a study on trafficking commissioned by the Government and welcomed the adoption of an action plan to combat prostitution and trafficking for sexual exploitation. Philippines made recommendations.  87. Slovenia commended Sweden as an exemplary democratic country with functional legal and institutional systems and high standards of human rights, as well as its contribution to international development. Slovenia was concerned about the lack of comprehensive legislation addressing racism as a crime. Slovenia asked what concrete measures Sweden was planning to address that gap. Slovenia made a recommendation. 88. Burkina Faso recognized Sweden as a country continuously engaging in the promotion of human rights at both the national and international levels. Burkina Faso noted with appreciation Sweden’s commitment to promoting women’s human rights and gender equality, as well as to developing programmes for minorities and indigenous communities.  89. Bangladesh highlighted Sweden’s social security system and the fact that Sweden had reached the target of 0.7 per cent of official development assistance. It noted CERD’s concern about the absence of criminal law provisions against incitement to racial hatred. It asked about addressing the propagation of racial and religious hatred by publishing, in the name of freedom of expression. It noted CEDAW’s concern that immigrant, refugee and minority women faced discrimination and CRC’s concern about discrimination against minority children and child refugees, migrants and asylum-seekers. Another concern was child trafficking for sexual exploitation. Bangladesh made recommendations.  90. Palestine noted challenges, particularly in the areas of racial discrimination, violence against women and the protection of the rights of the elderly and persons with disabilities, but also took note of efforts made to protect human rights, including those of migrants, refugees and asylum seekers, in addition to the rights of children. Palestine also thanked Sweden for receiving Palestinian refugees and integrating them into society. Palestine made a recommendation. 91. Viet Nam took note of various policies and measures implemented by Sweden to protect and promote human rights, and welcomed its achievements in the areas of education, health and other social services. Viet Nam also commended Sweden for strengthening mechanisms to address the trafficking in persons. However, it reminded Sweden to be cautious when addressing country situations in international forums. It made recommendations.  92. Uzbekistan noted measures taken to promote and protect human rights, but observed the existence of discrimination against immigrants and ethnic minorities, referring to treaty body findings regarding the lack of a clear prohibition of racist organizations in criminal law.  Uzbekistan also observed that there was no clear definition of the crime of torture in legislation. Uzbekistan made recommendations. 93. In its responses to the questions and comments of various delegations, Sweden reaffirmed its policy regarding full respect for the absolute banning of torture; clarified its position that discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation was contrary to international law; further elaborated on the implementation of the Anti-Discrimination Act; and referred to its policy on anti-Semitism, the plan of action for safeguarding children from sexual exploitation, its policy on promoting gender equality and a proposal to introduce increased consultation of Sami people. 94. The delegation provided the assurance that appropriate follow-up would be given to the universal periodic review recommendations and that civil society would be consulted in that regard.  II. Conclusions and/or recommendations 95. The recommendations formulated during the interactive dialogue and listed below have been examined by Sweden and enjoy its support: 95.1. Complete the work on clarifying the legal consequences of the ratification of ILO Convention No. 169 as a matter of priority (Norway); 95.2. Consider ratifying ILO Convention No. 169 as a matter of priority (Norway); 95.3. Amend the Swedish Constitution so as to give explicit recognition to the Sami people (Greece); 95.4. Enact the crimes set out in the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court in its domestic law, as appropriate (Canada); 95.5. Review its legislation in order to prohibit the trade and transit of arms to places where it is suspected that children are used as soldiers (Mexico); 95.6. Incorporate into its domestic law norms protecting all children, including indigenous children, in line with the Convention on the Rights of the Child (Plurinational State of Bolivia); 95.7. Further incorporate, as appropriate, its international obligations under human rights instruments into domestic law (Jordan); 95.8. Conduct a thorough inventory of laws and regulations to bring to light those that are not in accordance with the right to equality and/or CRPD (United Kingdom); 95.9. Ensure that all laws, regulations, policies and practices are consistent with the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and with rights to equality generally, as part of, or in addition to, the multitrack strategy referred to in its report (New Zealand); 95.10. Consider establishing a national human rights institution in conformity with the Paris Principles (Djibouti)2; 95.11. Consider establishing an independent national institution to protect and promote human rights, in compliance with the Paris Principles (Russian Federation); 95.12. Consider establishing an independent national human rights institution in full compliance with the Paris Principles (India); 95.13. Consider establishing a national human rights institution in accordance with the Paris Principles (Jordan)3; 95.14. Undertake a national survey to assess the exact number of homeless children throughout the world and the root causes of this phenomenon, in order to develop a national plan of action to specifically address and remedy this problem (Switzerland); 95.15. Enhance its cooperation programmes and its assistance to developing countries (Philippines); 95.16. Continue to provide overseas development assistance at the United Nations agreed level to help developing countries to realize economic and social rights (Bangladesh); 95.17. Continue its efforts to ensure full respect for human rights and further pursue the implementation of the national action plan in that direction, taking into account as a matter of priority the importance of respecting the freedoms of religion and belief (Palestine); 2 	The recommendation as read during the interactive dialogue: “Establish a national human rights institution in conformity with the Paris Principles” (Djibouti). 3 	The recommendation as read during the interactive dialogue: “Consider re-establishing a national human rights institution in accordance with the Paris Principles” (Jordan). 95.18. Continue to make efforts to guarantee equality between men and women so that women may play important roles in the decision-making processes of public institutions (Nicaragua); 95.19. Continue to move forward in its efforts to achieve full equality in remuneration between men and women (Colombia); 95.20. Take further measures to protect the rights of women in the family and society and ensure their equality in all areas (Viet Nam); 95.21. Intensify efforts to prevent, combat and prosecute hate speech violating article 20 of ICCPR (Egypt)4; 95.22. Ensure that relevant criminal law provisions and policy directives are effectively implemented (Egypt)5; 95.23. Adopt further special measures to prevent, combat and punish hate crimes as well as xenophobia and racism (South Africa); 95.24. Continue its efforts to vigorously prevent, combat and prosecute violent hate crimes (United States); 95.25. Increase efforts to ensure the implementation of legislation prohibiting racist crimes in practice (Qatar)6; 95.26. Adopt comprehensive legislation to combat racism as a crime (Qatar)7; 95.27. Envisage implementing effective measures aimed at sustainably preventing and combating xenophobia and racist manifestations (Algeria); 95.28. Collect and generate disaggregated data on actual manifestations of racism and discrimination (Brazil); 95.29. Take concrete and stern actions to ensure equal treatment for all in society, in particular to remove de facto discrimination against and xenophobic attitudes towards migrants, asylum seekers, refugees and other ethnic/religious minorities (Pakistan); 95.30. Undertake a comprehensive set of measures to combat racism and racial discrimination (Islamic Republic of Iran); 4 	The recommendation as read during the interactive dialogue: “Implement a ban on racist organizations in line with international obligations, and to intensify efforts to prevent, combat and prosecute hate speech violating article 20 of the ICCPR, and ensure that relevant criminal law provisions and policy directives are effectively implemented (Egypt)”. 5 	The recommendation as read during the interactive dialogue: “Implement a ban on racist organizations in line with international obligations, and to intensify efforts to prevent, combat and prosecute hate speech violating article 20 of the ICCPR, and ensure that relevant criminal law provisions and policy directives are effectively implemented (Egypt)”. 6 	The recommendation as read during the interactive dialogue: “Adopt comprehensive legislation to combat racism as a crime and prohibit racist organizations, in accordance with its international obligations, and to increase efforts to ensure the implementation of legislation prohibiting racist crimes in practice, and to prohibit hate speech and prosecute perpetrators (Qatar)”.  7 	The recommendation as read during the interactive dialogue: “Adopt comprehensive legislation to combat racism as a crime and prohibit racist organizations, in accordance with its international obligations, and to increase efforts to ensure the implementation of legislation prohibiting racist crimes in practice, and to prohibit hate speech and prosecute perpetrators (Qatar)”.  95.31. Widely distribute information on available domestic remedies against acts of racial discrimination and the legal means available for obtaining compensation in the event of discrimination (Egypt); 95.32. Create greater awareness on the part of law enforcement personnel, and launch efforts in the field of education and training on tolerance and cultural diversity (Egypt)8; 95.33. Carry out national campaigns against all forms of discrimination, publish its new law against discrimination and ensure its implementation (Bolivia); 95.34. Strengthen efforts and take additional steps, in particular beyond the adoption of legislation, to prevent discrimination on the basis of ethnicity in all aspects of daily life (Austria); 95.35. Consider implementing the existing legislation on non-discrimination with respect to all children within its jurisdiction (Hungary); 95.36. Heed the observations of those treaty bodies that express concern about the multiple forms of discrimination suffered by minorities and vulnerable groups in Swedish society, bringing its domestic normative framework into line with international human rights norms to which it is a State party (Nicaragua); 95.37. Give particular attention to potential discrimination based on multiple grounds (Finland); 95.38. Intensify efforts intended to punish and prevent discrimination based on ethnic grounds in all areas of life, in particular in cases affecting children and women belonging to ethnic minorities, refugees and asylum-seekers and members of migrant families (Argentina); 95.39. Take additional steps to prevent discrimination against immigrant, refugee and minority women (Bosnia and Herzegovina); 95.40. Continue to address the concerns of human rights treaty bodies, special procedures and UNHCR in respect of immigrant, refugee and minority women in the area of equality and non-discrimination, and consider implementing, as appropriate, their recommendations (Jordan); 95.41. Intensify its efforts to further combat all discrimination on the ground of ethnic origin (Norway); 95.42. Take further measures to prevent discrimination on the basis of ethnicity (Bosnia and Herzegovina); 95.43. Take adequate measures to combat all forms of racial discrimination, racism and xenophobia on the basis of ethnicity (Uzbekistan); 95.44. Take additional measures to combat discrimination against national minorities, in particular the Sami and the Roma, and against immigrants, refugees and women (Russian Federation); 8 	The recommendation as read during the interactive dialogue: “Create greater awareness on the part of law enforcement personnel; and set up its efforts in the field of education and training in tolerance and cultural diversity, and launch, with the participation of all media, a process of reflection on the role and responsibility of the media to combat racism, xenophobia and related intolerance (Egypt)”.  95.45. Continue to increase the active promotion of equality of rights and opportunities, independently of sexual orientation or gender identity, and continue to play its active role at the international level in favour of legal protection against discrimination on the grounds of sexual orientation and gender identity (Colombia); 95.46. Combat negative stereotypes and prejudice against persons with disabilities (Islamic Republic of Iran); 95.47. Strengthen human rights education programmes at the national and local levels aimed at eradicating racism and xenophobia (Philippines); 95.48. Take practical and legislative measures to ensure impartial and effective investigations in the field of combating and preventing torture (Uzbekistan); 95.49. Consider increasing the financial resources allocated to programmes combating violence against women (Greece); 95.50. Strengthen existing efforts to prevent violence against women, including through financial support for shelters for victims of violence (Portugal); 95.51. Improve data collection and statistics on violence against women (Portugal); 95.52. Intensify its efforts to eliminate violence against women, in line with recommendations by the Human Rights Committee, the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women, CRC and the Special Rapporteur on violence against women (Netherlands); 95.53. Develop awareness-raising campaigns aimed at changing attitudes and behaviours related to domestic violence (Portugal); 95.54. Intensify its efforts to eliminate violence against women and to develop a national plan of action (Islamic Republic of Iran); 95.55. Intensify measures to avoid discrimination against women and to combat violence against them (Chile); 95.56. Continue to implement its effective measures to prevent discrimination against women and to combat violence against them (Botswana); 95.57. Continue addressing the issue of violence against women (Malaysia); 95.58. Continue the full implementation of its plan of action to combat violence perpetrated by men against women, violence and oppression in the name of honour, and violence in relations between people of the same sex (Colombia); 95.59. Take appropriate measures to stop sex tourism involving children and to punish traffickers (Belarus); 95.60. Facilitate complaints by foreign victims of trafficking so that their migration situation is not used against them as a means of coercion by the traffickers themselves (Mexico); 95.61. Work closely with the European Union to create a comprehensive anti.trafficking-in persons network (United States); 95.62. Adopt the measures necessary to protect people of different religious beliefs from discrimination (Greece); 95.63. Noting the Government’s commitment to the promotion and protection of the right to freedom of opinion and expression, continue ensuring that exercise of this right does not impact negatively on other fundamental rights, including the right to privacy and freedom of religion or belief, among others (Malaysia); 95.64. Take effective legislative, administrative and judicial measures against the propagation of racial and religious hatred in the media and through the Internet (Bangladesh); 95.65. Give the female population the opportunity to achieve high-level positions with important decision-making levels (Iraq); 95.66. Continue taking efficient measures with a view to decreasing and eventually eliminating the wage gap between men and women (Slovenia); 95.67. Continue taking measures to promote education for all children (Chile); 95.68. Continue to develop and institute effective mechanisms for improved dialogue and consultation with the Sami people in all areas of Government policy that affect them and in the development of legislation (Canada); 95.69. Implement effectively the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples, and establish mechanisms for its full implementation in full cooperation with the Sami people (Islamic Republic of Iran); 95.70. Implement measures aimed at eliminating discrimination against the Sami people, with particular focus on ensuring access to basis services in education, employment and health, as well as access to land, and ensuring that their right to land and cultural life is preserved (South Africa); 95.71. Initiate further studies on methods by which Sami land and resource rights could be established, taking into account the culture of the Sami community (Austria); 95.72. Develop measures in order to ensure that affected Sami communities can take part and participate actively in consultations held between federal government and municipalities on issues related to land rights, water and resources (Austria); 95.73. Remain proactive in combating discrimination against Sami and Roma and in protecting their economic, social and cultural rights in consultation with the communities concerned (Netherlands); 95.74. Move forward in the implementation of its law known as “from recognition to empowerment: a government strategy for minorities”, with the aim of promoting and protecting the rights of national minorities (Colombia); 95.75. Address the specific needs of minorities and migrants, particularly women and children (Bangladesh); 95.76. Authorize the detention of asylum seekers only in exceptional situations, and limit its duration (Algeria); 95.77. Ensure that its national legislation and practice effectively protect the principle of non-refoulement (Czech Republic); 95.78. Adopt legislative measures to guarantee that unaccompanied undocumented children are cared for (Spain)9; 95.79. Guarantee in equal fashion for both its national citizens and foreigners residing in Sweden the highest level of health possible, without any form of discrimination, pursuant to its international obligations, particularly those set out in ICESCR (Mexico); 95.80. Look into ways to effectively ensure that the principle of the best interests of the child will be a primary consideration and hence form the basis for and guide all related processes and decisions, especially in asylum cases involving children (Hungary); 95.81. Devote more efforts to reduce social exclusion and better integrate its growing immigrant population into all aspects of society (United States); 95.82. Give precedence to the principle of non-refoulement when considering the situation of refugees or asylum-seekers who allege that their lives, liberty or personal integrity may be at risk in their countries of origin (Argentina); 95.83. Adopt specific legal measures to better protect aliens and racial and ethnic groups against discrimination (Viet Nam); 95.84. Closely monitor the interpretation and application of the 2008 Surveillance Act to prevent any interference with the right to privacy (Netherlands); 95.85. Continue the efforts to increase the effectiveness of the national human rights system and share its experiences with other States in the process of undertaking similar reforms (Finland); 95.86. Broadly share the experience regarding the formulation and implementation of the second National Action Plan for Human Rights (Moldova); 95.87. Share national best practice and policies on ensuring non.discrimination, including proposals such as to include sexual orientation in the Constitution, with States and relevant international organizations (United Kingdom); 95.88. Continue its cooperation with civil society organizations in the follow-up to this review (Austria). 96. The following recommendations will be examined by Sweden, which will provide responses in due course, but no later than the fifteenth session of the Human Rights Council, in September 2010. The response of Sweden to these recommendations will be included in the outcome report adopted by the Human Rights Council at its fifteenth session: 96.1 Continue its efforts with a view to ratifying the Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance (Spain); 96.2. Ratify, as soon as possible, the Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance (France); 9 	The recommendation as read during the interactive dialogue: “Adopt legislative measures to guarantee the taking of care of unaccompanied undocumented children, as well as the right to education for all migrant boys and girls (Spain)”. 96.3. Allocate available resources and strengthen the preventive functioning of its national preventive mechanism under the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture (Czech Republic); 96.4. Consider withdrawing its reservation to ICCPR (Pakistan); 96.5. Withdraw its reservations to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (Czech Republic); 96.6. Ratify ILO Convention No. 169 (Bolivia); 96.7. Become a State party to the Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance (Argentina); 96.8. Adopt a legislative framework for ensuring the right of all migrant children to the best possible medical services and adequate housing, and fully implement those rights (Belarus); 96.9. Adopt into law the proposed changes to its constitutional framework to provide protection to all persons resident in Sweden against discrimination based on sexual orientation (Canada); 96.10. Establish an independent national human rights institution (Islamic Republic of Iran); 96.11. Establish an independent national human rights institution, and provide the financial and human resources necessary for its adequate operation (France); 96.12. Establish a national human rights institution in accordance with the Paris Principles (Pakistan); 96.13. Establish a national human rights institution in accordance with the Paris Principles (Bolivia); 96.14. Establish its national human rights institution in accordance with the Paris Principles in a timely manner (Indonesia); 96.15. Strengthen the capacities and expand the role of the Equality Ombudsman to cover the whole range of human rights, with a view to its possible assumption of the role of a national human rights institution, in accordance with the Paris Principles (Malaysia); 96.16. Guarantee that the national human rights institution has full independence in accordance with the Paris Principles (Nicaragua)10; 96.17. Adopt a policy to strengthen the institution of the family, and develop traditional family values in society (Belarus); 96.18. Clear the backlog of responses to thematic questionnaires from special procedures (Russian Federation); 96.19. Prohibit racist organizations, and take all measures to ensure that racist propaganda cannot be disseminated and that people are appropriately punished for committing racist crimes (Belarus); 10 The recommendation as read during the interactive dialogue: “Guarantee the Office of Ombudsman with full independence in accordance with the Paris Principles (Nicaragua)”. 96.20. Enact explicit laws criminalizing organizations and entities promoting or inciting racial or religious hatred, as well as publicly denounce such acts, when they occur, in line with recommendations of the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination (Pakistan); 96.21. Implement a ban on racist organizations, in line with international obligations (Egypt)11; 96.22. Implement a ban on racist organizations, in line with its international obligations (Islamic Republic of Iran); 96.23. Devise policies aimed at quelling racist platforms which incite hatred and discrimination within political parties and circles (Egypt); 96.24. Criminalize and effectively combat incitement to racial hatred, xenophobia and religious intolerance; including by prohibiting racist and xenophobic organizations and prosecuting perpetrators (Cuba); 96.25. Prohibit hate speech and prosecute perpetrators of racist crimes (Qatar)12; 96.26. Prohibit racist organizations, in accordance with its international obligations (Qatar)13; 96.27. Incorporate explicitly the crime of torture, as defined in the Convention against Torture, into domestic law (Canada); 96.28. Incorporate the prohibition of torture into its legislation (Islamic Republic of Iran); 96.29. Consider incorporating into its national legislation the specific crime of torture, reflecting fully the definition of torture in article 1 of the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, so that the grave nature of this crime is thus clearly visible and discernible from other crimes (Czech Republic); 96.30. Incorporate into domestic legislation the crime of torture as defined in CAT (Bolivia); 96.31. Include in its national legislation specific and explicit safeguards guaranteeing that no evidence obtained through torture or other ill treatment may be used before the court (Czech Republic); 96.32. Promote the institution of the family in its policies for the promotion and protection of human rights (Bangladesh); 11 	The recommendation as read during the interactive dialogue: “Implement a ban on racist organizations in line with international obligations, and to intensify efforts to prevent, combat and prosecute hate speech violating article 20 of the ICCPR, and ensure that relevant criminal law provisions and policy directives are effectively implemented (Egypt)”. 12 	The recommendation as read during the interactive dialogue: “Adopt comprehensive legislation to combat racism as a crime and prohibit racist organizations, in accordance with its international obligations, and to increase efforts to ensure the implementation of legislation prohibiting racist crimes in practice, and to prohibit hate speech and prosecute perpetrators (Qatar)”.  13 	The recommendation as read during the interactive dialogue: “Adopt comprehensive legislation to combat racism as a crime and prohibit racist organizations, in accordance with its international obligations, and to increase efforts to ensure the implementation of legislation prohibiting racist crimes in practice, and to prohibit hate speech and prosecute perpetrators (Qatar)”.  96.33. Take serious measures to address such irresponsible acts as the recent publication of an outrageous poster of Prophet Muhammad as well as a blasphemous video message by one of the Swedish political parties, which merely perpetuate religious hatred and intolerance (Indonesia); 96.34. Pay more attention to the issues of Islamophobia, hatred towards Muslims, and incitement to hatred against Islam and Muslims, including through newspaper articles and caricatures of the Prophet Mohammed published by certain media under the pretext of freedom of expression, which are an affront to many Muslims throughout the world and an affront to their beliefs and are denounced by all international instruments to which Sweden is a party (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya); 96.35. Take concrete actions to reduce the gender gap in decision-making positions as well as to ensure equal remuneration for men and women (Pakistan); 96.36. Transfer the administration of land-user rights and land use to the Sami people (Greece); 96.37. Include representatives of the Sami people in all political, economic and social decisions that concern them, on an equal footing with others (Bolivia); 96.38. Provide all necessary support to the Sami people so that they may make use of legal resources that enable them to defend their rights, on an equal footing (Bolivia); 96.39. Consider alternatives to the detention of irregular migrants and asylum seekers, limit the length of detentions, and ensure that detainees have access to the judiciary, to consular assistance and to adequate information (Brazil); 96.40. Guarantee for all undocumented migrants access to the same health.care system, on the same basis, as persons with residence permits (Brazil); 96.41. Improve the services, especially social services, provided to asylum-seekers; stress the importance of providing asylum-seekers deprived of means of subsistence with health insurance comparable to that afforded to nationals (France); 96.42. Put an end to denying the right to education of children belonging to minorities or who do not have a residency permit in the country (Cuba); 96.43. Ensure that those who find themselves in an irregular situation have legally recognized access to medical services and assistance, as provided in article 12 of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (Spain); 96.44. Adopt legislative measures to guarantee the right to education for all migrant boys and girls (Spain)14; 96.45. Use diplomatic assurances in a manner consistent with the UNHCR “Note on Diplomatic Assurance and International Refugee Protection” dated August 2006 (New Zealand); 14 	The recommendation as read during the interactive dialogue: “Adopt legislative measures to guarantee the taking of care of unaccompanied undocumented children, as well as the right to education for all migrant boys and girls (Spain)”. 96.46. Intensify its public policies in the area of homeless migrant children, by identifying the number of homeless children and their specific needs, and by guaranteeing their right to health, education and housing (Chile); 96.47. Review the law and practice related to the lengthy detention of asylum-seekers (South Africa); 96.48. Find, with reference to the law on screening electronic messages, a rational balance between upholding the rights of citizens and real steps to combat terrorism on the Internet, which should include a denial by Swedish services providers of sites to paramilitary organizations (Russian Federation); 96.49. Put an end to impunity as regards the use of Swedish territory as a transit territory for flights by the Central Intelligence Agency of the United States transporting people subjected to violation of their human rights (Cuba). 97. The recommendations below did not enjoy the support of Sweden: 97.1. Sign and ratify the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (Spain); 97.2. Proceed to the ratification of the International Convention for the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families, in conformity with recommendation No. 1737, of 17 March 2006, of the Council of Europe Parliamentary Assembly, of which Sweden is an active member (Algeria); 97.3. Become party to ICRMW (Pakistan); 97.4. Ratify the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families (Islamic Republic of Iran); 97.5. Ratify, as early as possible, the International Convention on the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their families (China); 97.6. Consider ratifying the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families (Nigeria); 97.7. Consider ratifying the International Convention on the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their families (Bosnia and Herzegovina); 97.8. Engage in national consultation on the possible ratification of the International Convention on the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their families (Philippines); 97.9. Become a State party to the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (Argentina); 97.10. Become a State party to the International Convention for the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant workers and Members of Their Families (Argentina); 97.11. Consider making some amendments to the Aliens Act, particularly as regards appeals against decisions from the Supreme Migration Court (Nigeria); 97.12. Launch, with the participation of all media, a process of reflection on the role and responsibility of the media with respect to combating racism, xenophobia and related intolerance (Egypt)15. 98. All conclusions and/or recommendations set out in the present report reflect the positions of the submitting State(s) and/or the State under review. They should not be construed as endorsed by the Working Group as a whole. 15 The recommendation as read during the interactive dialogue: “Create greater awareness on the part of 
law enforcement personnel; and set up its efforts in the field of education and training in tolerance 
and cultural diversity, and launch, with the participation of all media, a process of reflection on the 
role and responsibility of the media to combat racism, xenophobia and related intolerance (Egypt)”. 
Annex Composition of the delegation The delegation of Sweden was headed by the State Secretary, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Frank Belfrage, and was composed of the following members: • Mr. Hans Dahlgren, Ambassador, Permanent Mission of Sweden; • Mr. Carl-Henrik Ehrenkrona, Director-General for Legal Affairs, Ministry for Foreign Affairs; • Ms. Elinor Hammarskjöld, Director, Ministry for Foreign Affairs; • Ms. Maria Kelt, Director, Ministry of Justice; • Mr. Henrik Bergquist, Deputy Director, Ministry for Foreign Affairs; • Ms. Camilla Goldbeck-Löwe, Deputy Director, Ministry of Integration and Gender Equality; • Ms. Malin Ekman Aldén, Deputy Director, Ministry of Health and Social Affairs; • Ms. Maria Westman-Clement, Deputy Director, Ministry of Justice; • Mr. Göran Ternbo, Senior Adviser, Ministry of Agriculture; • Ms. Josefin Emanuel Brattberg, Desk Officer, Ministry of Integration and Gender Equality; • Ms. Charlotte Palmstierna, Desk Officer, Ministry of Health and Social Affairs; • Ms. Bilge Tekin Befrits, Desk Officer, Ministry of Integration and Gender Equality; • Ms. Frida Nilsson, Desk Officer, Ministry of Integration and Gender Equality; • Ms. Karin Kvarfordt, Desk Officer, Ministry of Agriculture; • Mr. Christoffer Berg, Minister-Counsellor, Permanent Mission of Sweden; • Ms. Anna Uggla, Second Secretary, Permanent Mission of Sweden; • Ms. Malin Häggqvist, Intern, Permanent Mission of Sweden. 