  United Nations  A/HRC/21/9    General Assembly   Distr.: General 6 July 2012  Original: English  Human Rights Council Twenty-first session Agenda item 6 Universal Periodic Review   Report of the Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review*  * The annex to the present report is circulated as received.   United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland Contents  Paragraphs Page   Introduction .............................................................................................................  1–4 3  I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process ................................................  5–109 3   A. Presentation by the State under review ...........................................................  5–19 3   B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review ........................  20–109 6  II. Conclusions and/or recommendations .....................................................................  110–111 15  Annex   Composition of the delegation .........................................................................................................  24 Introduction 1. The Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review (UPR), established in accordance with Human Rights Council resolution 5/1 of 18 June 2007, held its thirteenth session from 21 May to 4 June 2012.  The review of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland was held at the 7th meeting, on 24 May 2012. The delegation the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland was headed by Lord McNally, Minister of State, Ministry of Justice. At its 13th meeting, held on 30 May 2012, the Working Group adopted the report on the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland. 2. On 3 May 2012, the Human Rights Council selected the following group of rapporteurs (troika) to facilitate the review of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland: Angola, Indonesia and Norway. 3. In accordance with paragraph 15 of the annex to Council resolution 5/1 and paragraph 5 of the annex to resolution 16/21, the following documents were issued for the review of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland:  (a) A national report submitted/written presentation made in accordance with paragraph 15 (a) (A/HRC/WG.6/13/GBR/1);  (b) A compilation prepared by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) in accordance with paragraph 15 (b) (A/HRC/WG.6/13/GBR/2);  (c) A summary prepared by OHCHR in accordance with paragraph 15 (c) (A/HRC/WG.6/13/GBR/3). 4. A list of questions prepared in advance by Norway, Slovenia, Sweden and the Netherlands was transmitted to the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland through the troika. These questions are available on the extranet of the UPR.  I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process  A. Presentation by the State under review 5. At the thirteenth session, on 24 May 2012, the Minister of State for the United Kingdom introduced its national report.  He explained he was leading the United Kingdom delegation, supported by officials from within the Coalition Government and the Devolved Administrations of Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland. 6. The United Kingdom said it was proud of its human rights record but there was always room for improvement.  One of the strengths of universal periodic review was to learn from a wide variety of perspectives and experiences and make enjoyment of human rights a reality in people’s everyday lives throughout the world.  The United Kingdom was looking forward to hearing the views, perspectives and recommendations of other States.  The United Kingdom’s review came in the midst of the world’s worst financial crisis for over half a century.  In order to reduce the deficit and restore economic stability some very difficult decisions have had to be made to reduce public spending. In doing so, the United Kingdom had tried to protect the most vulnerable in society. 7. The United Kingdom reaffirmed its long-standing commitment to advancing human rights both at home and internationally.  The United Kingdom’s aim for the second UPR cycle was to strengthen this unique mechanism, preserving its universality and constructive spirit.  The United Kingdom believed it was for States to lead the way in establishing best practice and hoped to work with others to achieve this.  The Government had consulted broadly with civil society in all four nations of the United Kingdom and had engaged them in a frank and constructive discussion. The United Kingdom said information on the implementation of recommendations from the first round was in its national report. 8. The Coalition Government was firmly committed to promoting and protecting human rights and in its Programme for Government had reaffirmed its commitment to the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR).  The Government had established a Commission on a Bill of Rights to provide an opportunity to review how best to enshrine the Convention into domestic law, protecting and extending British liberties.  The Commission was due to report by the end of 2012. 9. The United Kingdom Government was committed to the effective operation of the European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR) and therefore proud of the substantial reform package achieved last month in the Brighton Declaration, under its Chairmanship of the Council of Europe.  The purpose of the reform was to ensure that more cases were resolved at the national level enabling the Court to focus more quickly on more important cases and helping it to better address the abuse of human rights in Europe. 10. Referring to questions posed by Norway and Sweden about pre-charge detention, terrorism prevention and investigation measures and the policy of deportation of terrorist suspects, the United Kingdom said that the first duty of any Government was to protect life and secure prosperity for all its people.  It was essential that the various arms of the State had the powers and ability to meet threats from terrorism but was equally necessary for the British justice system to be able to administer justice in a way that safeguards civil liberties and human rights.  The United Kingdom acknowledged that reconciling the demands of these two fundamentally important objectives is one of its greatest challenges. 11. The United Kingdom said it had recently undertaken a review of six of its counter-terrorism powers to ensure a correct balance between the State’s security powers and civil liberties.  As a result, the maximum period for pre-charge detention had been reduced from 28 to 14 days. To deal with exceptional circumstances, the review recommended publication of draft fast-track legislation which could be introduced where more than 14 days might be necessary. It would be a matter for Parliament to agree whether the maximum period could be extended to 28 days and a matter for a court to decide whether it was necessary in each individual case.  The review had also concluded that control orders should be replaced by a system of terrorism prevention and investigation measures (TPIM).  A TPIM notice can only be imposed if the statutory tests for its imposition have been met – including that the individual is reasonably believed to be involved in terrorism-related activity and that it is necessary to protect the public from a risk of terrorism.  There was an automatic, in-depth review of the Secretary of State’s decision to impose the TPIM notice by the High Court. The court considered the necessity and proportionality of each measure and its compliance with the ECHR. The court also ensures protection of the individual’s right to a fair hearing in accordance with article 6. 12. The United Kingdom said it would not deport a terrorist suspect where there were substantial grounds for believing that there was a real risk the individual will face torture or inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment. However, they believed that Government-to-Government assurances are a valid way of achieving its aim of protecting the public in accordance with international obligations. Arrangements are in place to verify that assurances are respected and in its ruling on Abu Qatada, the European Court of Human Rights has found that the United Kingdom’s policy is compatible with article 3, the prohibition of torture. 13. Responding to the Netherlands, the United Kingdom Government reaffirmed its commitment to the right to peaceful protest.  It said it supported the targeted and proportionate use of containment by the police as a key tactic to manage risks of violence and disorder at protests and its use in a way that minimized the impact on those protesting peacefully.  The European Court of Human Rights’ recent Austin judgment found that the use of containment as a police tactic was lawful if used proportionately. 14. Referring to questions from Sweden, Norway and Slovenia about policies on children’s rights, the United Kingdom believed that all children should be protected from violence and abuse.  Any punishment that constituted violence or abuse was unlawful.  In 2004 the law for England and Wales was amended so that parents could no longer use the “reasonable punishment” defence if prosecuted for assaults on their children which involved cruelty, or caused actual or grievous bodily harm. Similar measures had been taken in Scotland and Northern Ireland.  Research showed that fewer parents now used physical punishment, and the Government hoped the trend would continue. 15. Regarding its commitment to end child poverty, the United Kingdom Government had published its first-ever child poverty strategy, which set out action to tackle the complex causes of poverty, including unemployment and welfare dependency, family breakdown, low educational achievement, poor health and disability and financial insecurity.  The Devolved Administrations had their own strategies which complement each other. 16. Replying to Slovenia, the United Kingdom said it recognized the importance of supporting children of offenders, both for their own sake and to prevent intergenerational crime.  The statutory framework set out in the Children’s Act 2004 required public bodies to make arrangements to safeguard and promote the welfare of children, including children of offenders. 17. The Minister for State made statements on behalf of the Scottish and Welsh Governments and Northern Ireland.  The Scottish Government was committed to creating a modern, inclusive Scotland that respects and realizes human rights.  Scotland’s devolved institutions must observe and implement obligations entered into by the United Kingdom under the European Convention on Human Rights and other international treaties. The Scottish Government had been positively engaged in the UPR process and had sought to reflect Scottish best practice in particular areas.  Internationally, the Scottish Government had been at the forefront of championing climate justice. Scotland had its own national human rights institution (the Scottish Human Rights Commission), which currently chairs the European Group of National Human Rights Institutions. 18. The Welsh Government was committed to making Wales a fairer, more inclusive society, where all of its diverse communities could thrive. The universal periodic review (UPR) provided an opportunity to demonstrate the unique approach that has been developed in Wales to meet its international obligations and the needs of the Welsh people.  Since the 2008 review, there had been a number of successes in Wales, such as embedding the Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC) into Welsh law and development of its first strategic national policy to ensure equality of opportunity for the Gypsy Traveller community. 19. The United Kingdom Government was pleased to report that since its last review, Northern Ireland had enjoyed a period of political stability not seen in a generation. But, as in any society undergoing the transition from conflict, there remained difficult issues to resolve.  The United Kingdom Government would continue to play a role, but believed the best way to resolve such issues was through solutions from within Northern Ireland.  B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review 20. During the interactive dialogue, 60 delegations made statements. Recommendations made during the dialogue are to be found in section II of the present report. 21. The Philippines welcomed the statement released by the United Kingdom guaranteeing protection for overseas workers. It enquired if the Domestic Violence Rule would provide access to legal, financial and shelter assistance for abused women and domestic helpers while pursuing cases against employers. The Philippines made a recommendation. 22. Qatar commended the United Kingdom on its implementation of recommendations from the first UPR cycle and ratification of a number of international conventions on human rights. Qatar requested information on measures used to strengthen efforts to combat human trafficking. Qatar made a recommendation. 23. Romania congratulated the United Kingdom on its balance between various rights and the security of its citizens in the context of the fight against terrorism. Romania commended the many initiatives promoting gender equality but requested more detailed information on measures to advance gender equality, especially in rural areas. 24. The Russian Federation voiced concern about human rights problems in the United Kingdom despite its efforts to implement recommendations from the first UPR. It cited frequent cases of excessive use of force by British police in cities during mass demonstrations in 2011. It also expressed concern over the conditions of detention. It made recommendations. 25. Slovakia congratulated the United Kingdom on the adoption of Equality Act in 2010 and the ratification of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities in 2009 and the Council of Europe Convention on Action against Trafficking in Human Beings in 2008. Slovakia made three recommendations. 26. Slovenia commended the United Kingdom on the ratification of the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography, and for the withdrawal of its last two reservations to the Convention. Slovenia raised the issue of children of incarcerated parents and enquired about steps taken to support these children. Slovenia made recommendations. 27. Spain congratulated the United Kingdom on the adoption of the Equality Act in 2010 to ensure equal opportunities regardless of race, gender or economic situation. With respect to deportation of terrorism suspects without guarantees that they will not be tortured, Spain enquired about the extent of bilateral agreements that contain independent monitoring. Spain made recommendations. 28. Sudan asked the United Kingdom about measures taken to ensure equal pay for men and women. It expressed concern over the low age (10) for criminal responsibility of children. Sudan also enquired about criteria for juvenile justice questioning its compliance with the Rights of the Child. Sudan made recommendations. 29. Sweden welcomed the United Kingdom’s decision to prohibit the use of corporal punishment of children in schools. However, it referred to the Committee on the Rights of the Child’s concluding observation of 2002 that the United Kingdom should prohibit all corporal punishment of children. Sweden made a recommendation. 30. Referring to Switzerland’s recommendation in the 2008 review that the United Kingdom shorten the detention period for terror suspects, Switzerland welcomed the efforts to limit this detention period from 28 to 14 days. Switzerland considered any person arrested or detained by the armed forces of a state to be covered by that state’s jurisdiction and that State should respect its international obligations. Switzerland made recommendations. 31. Thailand commended the United Kingdom’s establishment of the three A-status national human rights institutions. It expressed satisfaction about efforts made to strengthen the rights of women and children but noted, however, the observation made by the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women on the absence of a comprehensive policy for the management of women in prison. Thailand suggested that investigations be undertaken into allegations concerning detention facilities in Afghanistan and Iraq. Thailand made recommendations. 32. Timor-Leste welcomed policy and legislative measures taken by the United Kingdom to combat discrimination and hate crimes. It also welcomed proposals to abolish the migrant workers visa and the plan to provide protection for overseas domestic workers from abuse. Timor-Leste enquired about measures to ensure the safety of migrant workers and whether the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families (ICRMW) would be ratified. 33. Trinidad and Tobago commended the United Kingdom for the acceptance of recommendations from the first cycle of UPR.  It made recommendations. 34. Turkey welcomed the establishment of an independent, judicial-led inquiry into allegations that the United Kingdom was implicated in the improper treatment of detainees held by other countries in the aftermath of 9/11. Turkey made recommendations. 35. Ukraine welcomed measures undertaken at the national level to combat violence against women and girls; particularly the Action Plan launched in 2011 and encouraged the British Government to strengthen its efforts for the protection and rehabilitation of the victims of violence. Ukraine made a recommendation. 36. The United States of America welcomed recent steps taken to reform the defamation law in England and Wales. It expressed concern about inconsistencies in differing trafficking laws in the devolved authorities of Northern Ireland, Wales and Scotland. It applauded the creation of the Hate Crime Action Plan and expected agencies to work together to address violence against women, immigrants, religious minorities, the disabled and children. The United States made recommendations. 37. Uruguay appreciated the task performed by the three NHRIs and noted with satisfaction measures adopted for the protection of domestic workers who have been victims of abuse in the United Kingdom.  Uruguay made recommendations. 38. Uzbekistan voiced concern about the United Kingdom’s independent investigations into deaths under suspicious circumstances and torture, referring to the Committee on the Rights of the Child’s concern about deaths under suspicious circumstances of six children in detention since the last review. Uzbekistan noted that the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women requested the United Kingdom to fully implement laws preventing disfiguring operations on female genitals and that gender equality was still an issue in certain State bodies. Uzbekistan made recommendations. 39. Viet Nam voiced concern regarding the impact of current austerity measures imposed by the United Kingdom Government, which will unfairly affect vulnerable groups such as women, children, the impoverished, disabled and migrants. Viet Nam made recommendations. 40. Algeria commended the ratification of two human rights instruments since the last review and noted steps taken to implement accepted recommendations. Algeria expressed concern about the continuing issue of gender wage inequalities, the provisions in the Race Relations Act which allow for public officials to discriminate, and reiterated its call for adherence to the ICRMW. Algeria made recommendations. 41. Angola welcomed the establishment of the human rights commissions of Scotland and Northern Ireland.  Angola commended the ratification of new international instruments such as the CRPD and the Convention on Action against Trafficking in Human Beings. Angola recognized the United Kingdom’s efforts to implement accepted recommendations. Angola made recommendations. 42. Argentina congratulated the United Kingdom on the adoption of the Equality Act to combat discrimination. It expressed its opposition to the inclusion of the Falkland Islands (Malvinas)1 in the list of overseas territories in paragraph 140 of the national report, and reaffirmed the wording of the note verbale presented by Argentina. Argentina made recommendations.  1 A dispute exists between the Governments of Argentina and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland concerning sovereignty over the Falkland Islands (Malvinas) (see ST/CS/SER.A/42). 43. The Minister of State noted that many of the contributions from States mirrored debates taking place in the United Kingdom. Regarding Argentina’s intervention, the United Kingdom’s position relating to the Falklands (Malvinas) had not changed, and was based on the principle of self-determination. 44. As outlined in the opening statement, the United Kingdom Government was committed to the promotion and implementation of children’s rights.  It noted that there had been significant developments since its last review, including the formal removal of the final two reservations to the Convention on the Rights of the Child, and it had ended the detention of children for immigration purposes in 2011. 45.  In England, the Government had given a commitment to Parliament to give due consideration to the Convention when making new policy and legislation. It was also introducing legislation to strengthen the role of the Children’s Commissioner for England.  In 2011 the Welsh Government enacted legislation which places a duty on its Ministers to have due regard to the CRC when making policies and legislation and the Scottish Government have consulted on introducing a similar duty. 46. Responding to Sweden’s question about prison overcrowding, the United Kingdom stated that it was committed to providing safe and well ordered establishments in which it treated prisoners humanely, decently and lawfully.  The United Kingdom would always need to have enough accommodation for those sentenced to custody by the courts, including maintaining a sufficient margin to enable us to manage population fluctuations. However, the United Kingdom’s focus was on trying to break the cycle of criminality by addressing the underlying causes including illiteracy, mental illness and alcohol and drug dependency. 47. The United Kingdom rejected absolutely the Russian Federation’s assertion that conditions in United Kingdom prisons amounted to torture. Prisons were subject to regular inspection by an independent inspectorate accountable to Parliament.  In the context of the 2011 summer disturbances, the United Kingdom said it was important that responses to public order situations were swift and targeted so they did not escalate, the public were protected and reassurances to communities could be given. The Home Secretary had asked Her Majesty’s Inspectorate of Constabulary to review the response to the disorder and they had made a number of recommendations to the police to consider. 48. Responding to Spain’s question about the right to water and sanitation, the United Kingdom said that it was committed to addressing the impact that inadequate water and poor sanitation has on the full enjoyment of human rights. This was shown by its recent announcement to double the commitment on water and sanitation results that were made last year. 49. In response to Qatar’s question, the United Kingdom said it was fully aware that it was a destination for trafficking.  In July 2011 the British Government launched its new strategy on trafficking, which takes a comprehensive approach to tackling this issue with a renewed focus on preventing human trafficking overseas. The Scottish Government had changed the law to tackle trafficking and was meeting European standards.  They were committed to working with other jurisdictions to ensure effective enforcement. 50. With regard to migrant and domestic workers, the United Kingdom said that the rights of migrant workers were already protected in domestic legislation, including in the Human Rights Act and it believed that the right balance had been struck between the need for a firm, fair and effective immigration system and for protection of the interests and rights of migrant workers and their families. 51. In response to Thailand’s question about changes affecting overseas domestic workers (ODWs), the United Kingdom said it had not seen convincing evidence that the changes made would lead to an increase in trafficking.  The protections already in place to minimize the risk of ODWs being subject to forced labour would remain, including the new offence of holding someone in slavery or servitude, introduced in 2009. 52. In response to Sudan’s question about the gender pay gap, the United Kingdom said that there were a number of causes and that they were using a range of approaches to close the gap, including extending the right to request flexible working and promoting a new system of flexible parental leave.  The new voluntary framework for gender equality reporting, “Think, Act, Report”, would improve transparency on pay and wider workplace equality. 53. Australia commended the United Kingdom on the ratification of the CRPD and the Convention on Action against Trafficking in Human Beings. It welcomed efforts to reform the European Court of Human Rights aimed at expediting applications and commended the establishment of a Commission in 2012 to investigate the creation of a United Kingdom Bill of Rights. Australia also welcomed the establishment of Commissions in Scotland and Northern Ireland. Australia made recommendations. 54. Austria noted the changes made to the “Terrorism Prevention and Investigation Measures Act 2011” but expressed concern about the possibility of pre-charge detention and the admissibility of “secret evidence”. Austria enquired how the Government could guarantee a fair trial in all terrorism-related cases. Austria made recommendations. 55. Bangladesh commended the United Kingdom on the ratification of the CRPD and noted its commitment to spending 0.7 per cent of gross national income on overseas development assistance by 2013. It requested details on these plans. Bangladesh expressed concerns about reports of negative public attitudes towards Muslims and voiced concern over the use of detention in immigration control. Bangladesh made recommendations. 56. Belarus appreciated the national report of the United Kingdom.  Belarus voiced concern over the systematic use of torture by the British forces vis-à-vis detainees outside the country, lengthy secret detentions, reservations placed on human rights treaties, the age of criminal responsibility, and children in custody.  Belarus made recommendations. 57. Botswana welcomed the addition of a third NHRC of Scotland and the review of counter terrorism and security powers. Botswana also welcomed United Kingdom’s endeavours to establish the cause of the 2011 summer riots and congratulated the United Kingdom on its commitment to implement most of the recommendations from the first UPR cycle. 58. Brazil welcomed the revisions made to the Race Relations Act of 2000 following its comments on racial profiling in 2008. Brazil commended the United Kingdom on the withdrawals of the last two reservations to the CRC expecting this to also protect children in custody. Brazil voiced concern that the Equality Act of 2010 still permits public officials to discriminate on the grounds of nationality, ethnic and national origin. Brazil made recommendations. 59. Burkina Faso commended the United Kingdom on the establishment of a third NHRC, the ratification of several international instruments, the adoption of the Equality Act in 2010 and initiatives to protect migrants, refugees and asylum seekers. It noted that some of the recommendations from the first review were still to be implemented and encouraged the ratification of the ICRMW and the ILO Convention of 2011 on Decent Work for Domestic Workers. 60. Chile appreciated the ratification of the CRPD, the withdrawal of reservations to the CRC and the legislative enshrinement of the right to the assistance of a lawyer for detainees within 48 hours following arrest. Chile congratulated the United Kingdom on the adoption of the Equality Act and the establishment of a Committee that will study a Rights Charter. Chile enquired about the potential impact that budgetary cuts made to free legal aid programmes will have on vulnerable sectors. Chile made recommendations. 61. China was concerned with the existence of discrimination against Muslims, Roma people and migrant workers and increased cases of racist incidents. China also asked the United Kingdom to elaborate on the measures taken to protect the fundamental freedom during the 2011 riots, especially those of the ordinary people who fell victim to the riots. China made a recommendation. 62. Colombia welcomed the recognition of sexual orientation as a ground for seeking asylum, as well as the equality strategy to promote gender equality. Regarding the promotion of the rights of migrants, Colombia hoped that the United Kingdom would consider the possibility of ratifying the ICRMW. Colombia made recommendations. 63. Costa Rica was concerned that it was still legal to inflict corporal punishment on children. It would like to know in what way the rights provided for in the human rights Conventions ratified by the United Kingdom were enforceable, if there had not yet been incorporated in national legislation. Costa Rica made recommendations. 64. Cuba was concerned that the national report did not contain enough information on the protection and promotion of economic, social and cultural rights, and stated that such basic rights had been affected by public cuts. Cuba added that children, persons with disabilities, women, migrants, minorities and indigenous populations were marginalized and disadvantaged on a daily basis. Cuba made recommendations. 65. Despite the progress made, Ecuador was concerned about reports on the supposed involvement of British officials in arbitrary detention, forced disappearances and torture of citizens of other countries through rendition flights and secret detention centres. Ecuador also expressed concern at the announcement of the possibility of changing the Security and Justice Act. Ecuador made recommendations. 66. Egypt was concerned about the persistence of racial and religious profiling and requested clarifications on the exceptional circumstances under which the police “stop and search” powers without suspicion could be exercised. It regretted the fact that the Equality Act of 2010 permitted public officials to discriminate on the basis of nationality, ethnic and national origins. Egypt made recommendations. 67. Estonia commended the United Kingdom on implementing the policy suggestions made during the previous review, particularly regarding the rights of the vulnerable. Furthermore, Estonia recognized the United Kingdom’s commitment to safeguarding the freedom of expression, to international development aid and the reforms of the European Court of Human Rights. Estonia made a recommendation. 68. Finland welcomed the commitment of the United Kingdom to the rights of child; however, according to the Committee on the Rights of the Child and other treaty bodies, it had not explicitly prohibited all corporal punishment of children. Finland noted that women in Northern Ireland did not have same access to all sexual and reproductive health care as women in other parts of the United Kingdom. Finland made recommendations. 69. France noted with satisfaction the United Kingdom’s intention to draft a “Bill of Rights” that would guarantee human rights. France welcomed the withdrawal of the reservations to the CRC and noted the United Kingdom’s position regarding the Council of Europe Convention on preventing and combating violence against women and domestic violence. France made recommendations. 70. In response to China’s question, the United Kingdom said that the riots that took place in some English towns and cities in 2011 were shocking acts of criminality which ruined business, brought destruction to its streets and made people feel unsafe in their own homes.  But the law-abiding majority had reclaimed the streets and helped with the recovery, with many examples of positive social action.  The United Kingdom was learning long-term lessons from these events.  Victims who had suffered loss or damage to property could claim under a compensation scheme. 71. The Russian Federation and others asked about children in armed conflict. The minimum age for entry into the armed forces reflects the normal school-leaving age of 16 and formal written consent is required from the parents of those under 18.  Under-18s are not deployed to operations outside the United Kingdom, except where the operation does not involve personnel being exposed to hostilities.  The country regards itself as compliant with the CRC. 72. Responding to Turkey, the United Kingdom said that the Government was fully committed to tackling hate crime as it had no place in a civilized society.  The UK had one of the strongest legislative frameworks in the world, including a new offence of stirring up hatred on the grounds of sexual orientation, alongside a cross-Government action plan to prevent hate crime happening in the first place.  The Welsh Government was currently developing a hate crime framework and the Scottish Government was providing over £ 9 million to organizations and projects working on the ground to help deliver race equality. 73. Responding to Brazil’s question about the proportionate use of stop-and-search, the United Kingdom said that unless the police had a description of a suspect, a person’s race, age or appearance could not be used alone or in combination as the reason for searching someone.  The Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 made clear that stop-and-search must not be conducted in a discriminatory way and in particular that a person’s religion should never be considered a reason to stop and search them. 74. Responding to Switzerland’s question about pre-charge detention, the United Kingdom said the law was applied consistently across the country.  However, those suspected of terrorism offences could be detained for up to 14 days before charge to reflect the particular complexity and the international nature of modern counter-terrorism investigations.  There were a range of safeguards in place and the British courts had recently confirmed these provisions were compliant with human rights obligations. 75. Regarding questions from Austria and Ecuador on the use of secret evidence in closed proceedings, the United Kingdom said that in a small number of cases highly relevant national security evidence if heard in public would jeopardize the methods or identities of its security services or those with whom it collaborates. It was trying to put in place a system that enabled those cases to go to court in accordance with the rule of law. 76. Regarding questions from Switzerland and Belarus about rendition and torture, the United Kingdom said that it unreservedly condemned any practice of extraordinary rendition to torture and it did not render people in breach of its legal obligations.  Robust processes were in place to deal with allegations of any form of mistreatment by United Kingdom armed forces and appropriate action was taken when there was a case to answer. 77. Responding to Angola’s question, the United Kingdom said that it wasn’t possible to comment further about the case of Jimmy Mubenga whilst investigations were outstanding but that his death was currently the subject of three investigations. 78. In response to questions about the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons against Enforced Disappearance (CPED), the United Kingdom said that it was keen to move towards ratification but that it did not sign international treaties unless it knew it could ratify them quickly. The undertaking would require considerable resource and parliamentary time; as a minimum the United Kingdom would need to create a new criminal offence. 79. The United Kingdom said that it would ensure that the recommendation by the United States regarding greater resources for the Historic Enquiries Team, were communicated to the Devolved Administration in Northern Ireland. 80. In regard to Chile’s question about the impact of the legal-aid reforms on vulnerable groups, the United Kingdom said that reforms in England and Wales had been subject to considerable amendments during the passage of the legislation in response to concerns raised by NGOs and Parliament.  Public funding for the most vulnerable groups had been preserved but the impact would remain under review.  The Scottish Government’s reforms to legal aid were also designed to maintain access to justice as much as possible. 81. Germany asked about the United Kingdom’s response to concerns regarding reports on regular screening of personal data and house searches of Muslims solely because of their religious affiliation, several seemingly overly broad and vaguely worded provisions in counter-terrorism legislation, and the use of racial profiling in the exercise of the so-called “stop and search” powers. Germany asked for information on how the interim results of the European Union study on the effects that the imprisonment of a parent had on a child had been assessed, and what steps were taken to improve support for children with parents in prison. Germany asked what had been done to address the recommendation to introduce a procedure for determining stateless claims. Germany stated that its strong recommendations remained, making reference to the “Blue Group”. Germany made a recommendation. 82. Greece wanted to know measures taken to alleviate the impact of the financial crisis on women and measures to be undertaken to eliminate racial discrimination in policing. Greece welcomed the establishment of a National Referral Mechanism for victims of trafficking. Greece made recommendations. 83. Guatemala congratulated the United Kingdom for its withdrawal of two reservations to CRC and its ratification to the Optional Protocol to CRC on the sale of children and the CRPD. Regarding the issue of discrimination, Guatemala asked what exceptions were allowed by the 2010 Equality Act. Guatemala also wanted to know the main elements of the Action Plan on Domestic Violence, since when it had been enforced, and what the results were. Guatemala made a recommendation. 84. Honduras noted particularly the implementation of the Equality Act and the body of laws prohibiting direct or indirect discrimination, harassment, victimization and other specific conducts. Honduras made recommendations. 85. Hungary asked about the legal reasons for not explicitly prohibiting corporal punishment of children, the problem of the growing number of women prisoners, and measures taken to ensure that human rights education is provided everywhere in the country. Hungary also asked about the timeline to enact the Defamation Bill, and what were the most debated questions in connection with this law. Hungary made recommendations. 86. India noted concerns that many public bodies faced difficulties in mainstreaming gender equality into policies and on the continuing prevalence of racial prejudice, discrimination against ethnic minorities, immigrants and asylum seekers. On the issue of immigrants and asylum seekers, India would like to know what the situation on the ground is, and what could be the basis for those concerns. India made a recommendation. 87. Indonesia noted positively the efforts taken by the United Kingdom in the promotion of equality, its good practices in tackling hate crimes at the international level and in interfaith dialogue. Indonesia made recommendations. 88. The Islamic Republic of Iran was alarmed by reports indicating the United Kingdom’s complicity in the secret detention of persons as well as torture and punishment in detention facilities in Iraq and Afghanistan. It made recommendations. 89. Iraq asked about the outcome of discussions on the draft Defamation Bill and its impact on the rights of freedom of expression and opinion. The second question concerned the mandate and competencies of the Scottish Committee of Human Rights. Iraq made recommendations. 90. Japan greatly appreciated the measures taken to protect freedom of expression on-  and off-line. Moreover, Japan asked what sort of self-regulatory mechanisms had been in place in order to strike a balance between challenges such as infringement of individual privacy and violation of intellectual property rights and protecting human rights online. Japan made recommendations. 91. Malaysia was concerned at the negative public attitudes towards minority groups, including Muslims, and with the reports on abuse or attacks against schoolchildren owing to their religious affiliation. Furthermore, Malaysia expressed concern that the powers regarding terrorism prevention and investigation were exercised in a discriminatory manner. Malaysia made recommendations. 92. Mexico reiterated its recognition of the United Kingdom’s contribution in the rule of law and in the legal framework for protecting individuals, particularly international human rights law. Mexico made recommendations. 93. Morocco asked about the follow-up to the work of the Independent Commission of Inquiry in charge of determining whether the Government had participated in ill-treatment as part of counter-terrorism operations abroad. Morocco also asked about national strategies in combating violence against women and girls as well as the policies in relation to women and children in prison. Morocco made recommendations. 94. Mozambique noted with appreciation the implementation of the majority of the provisions of the Equality Act. Mozambique also encouraged the United Kingdom to pursue its target of spending 0.7 per cent of the gross national income on development cooperation and assistance by 2013. 95. Nepal commended the United Kingdom for the establishment of national human rights institutions and the enactment of the Equality Act. Nepal noted with appreciation the overarching approach to advancing gender equality and the strategic vision to tackle violence against women and to promote their rights. Nepal made recommendations. 96. The Netherlands recognized the contribution of the United Kingdom to make the UPR process more effective in general, and noted the obligation to respect individual rights when pursuing important public goods such as security. The Netherlands made recommendations. 97. New Zealand asked the United Kingdom to provide information on its reservations to the CRPD and on plans to reform the Commission for Equality and Human Rights. New Zealand made a recommendation. 98. Nicaragua commended the United Kingdom’s ratification of the CRPD and encouraged the country to strengthen the criminal justice system. Nicaragua expressed concern about reports of systematic cases of caste-based discrimination, which should be prohibited in the country. Nicaragua made recommendations. 99. Norway welcomed the United Kingdom’s commitment to repeal control orders legislation and to replace control orders with a more focused system of terrorism prevention and investigations systems. Regarding the rights of the child, Norway noted the introduction of new measures to get a broader understanding of causes and consequences of poverty. Norway made recommendations. 100. Pakistan asked the United Kingdom about the measures taken to improve the situation of schoolchildren in Northern Ireland who were often targets of abuse or attacks owing their religious affiliation. Pakistan also expressed its view that the Government should be more proactive in promoting State multiculturalism. Pakistan made recommendations. 101. Paraguay welcomed the establishment of new NHRIs. Paraguay was concerned about information regarding a significant increase in the detention of adults because they were immigrants, and asked about the measures taken to prevent this situation. Paraguay made a recommendation. 102. In regard to the position of Muslim communities, the United Kingdom Government was working closely with Muslim communities to ensure that they continued play a key role in British society and in finding solutions to the problems we face. 103. The United Kingdom reassured Trinidad and Tobago that it would continue to provide support to the Overseas Territories to help them meet international human rights standards. 104. Regarding New Zealand’s question, the United Kingdom said that its reservations against the CRPD would be reviewed periodically and where they are no longer necessary they will be removed. 105. In response to a question by Uzbekistan regarding arms exports, the United Kingdom said it took its export responsibilities seriously and was committed to operating a robust export-control regime. 106. Regarding Australia’s question, the United Kingdom said that it was determined to tackle the serious issue of domestic violence and on International Women’s day this year the Prime Minister and Deputy Prime Minister issued a joint statement announcing their intention to work towards signing the Council of Europe’s Convention on Violence Against Women and Domestic Violence. 107. Regarding the Defamation Bill, the United Kingdom welcomed the interest in this area and said it was firmly committed to reforming the law in this area and was determined to ensure that the legislation struck the right balance between the right to freedom of expression and the protection of reputation. 108. The United Kingdom thanked the President of the Human Rights Council for her careful stewardship of the session and thanked other member states for their interventions which were thought provoking and challenging but delivered in a spirit of cooperation.  Due to the time constraints it was not possible to cover all the questions raised but the United Kingdom undertook to send written responses. The United Kingdom Government now looked forward to discussing the recommendations both at state level and with the Devolved Administrations of Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland.  There would also be consultation with the UK’s three National Human Rights Institutions and other NGOs before formally responding to the Human Rights Council in September. 109. The United Kingdom was pleased to be standing as a candidate for the Human Rights Council for the term 2014–2016.  If re-elected, it would continue to strive for enhanced promotion of human rights and for further cooperation on human rights among all Member States and across the United Nations system.  The United Kingdom finished by reminding other States that the United Kingdom would be celebrating two major events this summer, Her Britannic Majesty’s Golden Jubilee and the London Olympic and Para-Olympic Games.  II. Conclusions and/or recommendations**  ** The conclusions and recommendations have not been edited. 110. The following recommendations will be examined by the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland which will provide responses in due time, but no later than the twenty-first session of the Human Rights Council in September 2012.  The response of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to these recommendations will be included in the outcome report adopted by the Human Rights Council at its twenty-first session in September 2012:  110.1. Ratify the First Optional Protocol to the ICCPR (Estonia);  110.2. Accept the full implementation of the provisions of the CAT and the ICCRP in overseas territories under its control (Iran (Islamic Republic of));  110.3. Recognize the extraterritorial application of the CAT, according to its jurisprudence (Nicaragua);  110.4. Lift multiple reservations to international human rights treaties, including the ICESCR and the Optional Protocols to the CRC (Belarus);  110.5. Consider an early ratification of the newest international human right instrument – the third Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on a communication procedure (Slovakia);  110.6. Consider withdrawing its declaration to Article 1 of the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Right of the Child on Involvement of Children in Armed Conflict, and raise the armed forces minimum recruitment age to 18 (Slovenia);  110.7. Withdraw its reservations to the CRC concerning detained and asylum seeking children (Iran (Islamic Republic of));  110.8. Withdraw its interpretive statement on the OP to the CRC on the involvement of children in armed conflict (Russian Federation);  110.9. Incorporate fully, as a matter of urgency, the principles and provisions of the CRC into domestic law (Slovakia);  110.10. Take all measures necessary to fully implement the CRC (France);  110.11. Consider withdrawing its interpretative declaration on article 4 of the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, as recommended by the Committee on Racial Discrimination as well as take measures aimed at eliminating racial discrimination, incitement of racial hatred (Algeria);  110.12. Withdraw its reservations and interpretative statement with respect to Article 4 of the ICERD (Iran (Islamic Republic of));  110.13. Remove reservations to the CEDAW (Greece);  110.14. Consider the possibility of ratifying the international Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families (Chile);  110.15. Consider acceding to the ICRMW (Ecuador);  110.16. Consider the possibility of ratifying the ICRMW and ILO Convention No. 143 on Migrations in Abusive Conditions and the Promotion of Equality of Opportunity and Treatment of Migrant Workers (Honduras);  110.17. Protect the children and families of migrants and refugees, and accede to the ICRMW (Morocco);  110.18. Ratify the ICRMW (Egypt, Guatemala, Sudan); Accede to the ICRMW (Uruguay, Iran (Islamic Republic of));  110.19. In conformity with article 77 of the ICRMW, recognize the competence of the Committee to receive and consider communications which allege violations of individual rights recognized by this Convention (Uruguay);  110.20. Establish a timetable for signature and ratification of the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance, and for full recognition of the competence of the Committee on Enforced Disappearance (France);  110.21. Work on accession to the Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance (Iraq);  110.22. Accelerate its current efforts to sign and ratify the CED (Japan);  110.23. Ratify the CED (Austria); Accede to the CED (Uruguay);  110.24. Continue efforts to ratify the CED (Argentina);  110.25. In conformity with articles 31 and 32 of the CED, recognize the competence of the respective monitoring body to receive and consider communications from individuals and States that allege that they have been victims of violations of the provisions of the Convention (Uruguay);  110.26. Ratify the CED, the first OP-ICCPR and OP-ICESCR (Spain);  110.27. Ratify ILO Convention No. 189 on Domestic Workers (Uruguay);  110.28. Consider ratifying ILO Convention 189 on Decent Work for Domestic Workers and the ICRMW (Philippines);  110.29. Sign and ratify the Council of Europe Convention on Preventing and Combatting Violence against Woman and Domestic Violence (France);  110.30. Consider the effect and continued relevance of its remaining reservations to the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, and consider the possibility of withdrawing them (New Zealand);  110.31. Withdraw reservations made upon the ratification of the CRPD (Hungary);  110.32. Continue to ensure that human rights principles are integrated in domestic laws (Qatar);  110.33. Consider that any person detained by its armed forces is under its jurisdiction, and respect its obligations concerning the human rights of such individuals (Iran (Islamic Republic of));  110.34. Introduce law that will criminalize use of children in military actions (Uzbekistan);  110.35. Prohibit under the law the sale of weapons to the countries where children have been or are used in military actions (Uzbekistan);  110.36. Adopt measures necessary to ensure the independence of the Commissioners in accordance with the Paris Principles (Costa Rica);  110.37. Ensure that the reform process of the Equality and Human Rights Commission does not affect its independence in conformity with the Paris Principles (Morocco);  110.38. Introduce legislation at the earliest opportunity to give the Children’s Commissioner for England an explicit role of promoting and protecting children’s rights in line with the CRC and to make the Commissioner more independent from Government and more accountable to Parliament (Australia);  110.39. Develop appropriate policies and targeted measures in ensuring genuine equality in accordance with the recommendation of the Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (Uzbekistan);  110.40. Continue efforts in the promotion of women rights (Indonesia);  110.41. Set out a clear pathway to meet the goal of ending child poverty in the UK by 2020 as stated in the Coalition’s programme for government (Norway);  110.42. Continue efforts in enhancing the welfare of all segments of society and protect their rights (Nepal);  110.43. Intensify its efforts to promote multiculturalism at all levels (Pakistan);  110.44. Take further measures for the promotion and protection of human rights, including those of migrants (Nepal);  110.45. Continue to support overseas territories to abide with basic human rights protection for all (Trinidad and Tobago);  110.46. Adopt and implement a concrete plan of action realizing recommendations of treaty bodies and UN human rights mechanisms, and international human rights obligations (Iran (Islamic Republic of));  110.47. Improve the response rate of the UK to the communications from the Human Rights Council mechanisms (Hungary);  110.48. On the basis of the UK’s commitment to the rule of law, comply with the rulings of the European Court of Human Rights on the cases concerning the United Kingdom, as well as promote the participation and cooperation of the European Union and its Member States with the Court (Mexico);  110.49. Review national legislation to ensure equality and non-discrimination (Egypt);  110.50. Continue stepping up its efforts in tackling discrimination and inequality for all its citizens (Indonesia);  110.51. Continue efforts to combat discrimination on any ground and violence against women and girls (Cuba);  110.52. Give priority attention to the questions of gender equality and discrimination against women (Uzbekistan);  110.53. Take effective measure to eliminate discrimination on the grounds of race, religion and nationality and to guarantee the rights of Muslims, Roma people and migrant workers (China);  110.54. Take further steps to address ethnic profiling in practice (Greece);  110.55. Revise the policies that involve racial and ethnic profiling such as “stop and search” practice (Brazil);  110.56. Investigate allegations that stop and search orders disproportionately fall on persons belonging to ethnic, religious and other minorities and introduce adequate safeguards in this regard (Austria);  110.57. That the law enforcement authorities put an end to stop and search practices based on religious and ethnic profiling (Pakistan);  110.58. Put an end to the use of religious profiling in combating terrorism by inserting legal safeguards against abuse and the deliberate targeting of certain religious groups (Malaysia);  110.59. Take all appropriate measures to combat prejudices and negative stereotypes, which may result in racial discrimination or incitement to racial hatred (Turkey);  110.60. Implement ECRI’s recommendation to continue to monitor hate crimes and to work with the community to increase understanding of the impact of such offences, and to pursue efforts to improve the police gathering of evidence of racist motivations (Turkey);  110.61. Put in practice a national strategy to eliminate discrimination against caste, through the immediate adoption of the Equality Law of 2010 that prohibits such discrimination, in conformity with its international human rights obligations, including CERD’s General Recommendation 29 and recommendations of the Special Rapporteur on Contemporary Forms of Racism (Nicaragua);  110.62. Adopt Government policies and legislations to address the pay gap between men and women (Sudan);  110.63. Consider policies and legal provisions to encourage equal pay practices (India);  110.64. Take measures to address the existing wage gap between men and women (Algeria);  110.65. Revitalize endeavours intended for eradication of the wage gap between men and women that has reportedly stalled (Ukraine);  110.66. Consider strengthening policies to combat discrimination in all areas, notably in employment and education (Morocco);  110.67. Ensure that inquiries are carried out immediately, independently, and transparently in cases where members of the armed forces are suspected of having committed acts of torture, particularly in the context of their service abroad (Switzerland);  110.68. Along with the Special Procedures, investigate allegations of the systematic use of torture by British soldiers vis-à-vis detainees outside the country, and inform the results of these investigations to the UN human rights mechanisms, including the Human Rights Committee, Human Rights Council and its mechanisms (Belarus);  110.69. Adopt a national strategy to combat all forms of violence against women and girls (Brazil);  110.70. Continue making progress in implementing the Action Plan on violence against women and girls (Colombia);  110.71. Take more effective measures to combat all forms of violence against women and girls and to ensure that the perpetrators of violence are taken to justice and punished (Malaysia);  110.72. Increase efforts to combat trafficking in persons, particularly to protect women and children (Spain);  110.73. Continue making progress in applying the strategy on trafficking in persons adopted in July 2011 (Colombia);  110.74. Implement the EU Directive on trafficking in human beings by April 2013 and sign the Council of Europe Convention on Preventing and Combating Violence Against Women and Domestic Violence (Australia);  110.75. Standardize anti-trafficking responses across the UK insofar as possible given the devolution of law enforcement powers, and appoint a rapporteur in each devolved authority to make critical assessments and improve the UK’s overall anti-trafficking response (United States of America);  110.76. Take all measures to ensure that all trafficked people are able to access the support and services they are entitled to, including free legal aid and access to their right to compensation (Greece);  110.77. Ensure by legislative and other measures that women in Northern Ireland are entitled to safe and legal abortion on equal basis with women living in other parts of the United Kingdom (Finland);  110.78. Reconsider its position about the continued legality of corporal punishment of children (Sweden);  110.79. Take measures to ensure the freedom of children from physical punishment in accordance with the Convention on the Rights of the Child (Norway);  110.80. Introduce a ban on all corporal punishment of children as recommended by the CRC and other treaty bodies (Finland);  110.81. Strengthen guarantees for detained persons, and not to extend but to shorten the length of time of pre-trial detention (Iran (Islamic Republic of));  110.82. Ensure realization of the right of detainees to the legal assistance immediately after being taken into detention without exception (Russian Federation);  110.83. Continue efforts to ensure that “secret evidence” is only used in cases where there is a serious and immediate threat to public security and ensure independent and effective judicial oversight (Austria);  110.84. Begin an independent investigation of all cases of arbitrary detention denounced due to UK’s implication in the program of secret detention led by the United States (Nicaragua);  110.85. Facilitate the ICRC access to prisons (Iran (Islamic Republic of));  110.86. Take measures to reduce prison overcrowding and improve conditions for detainees (Russian Federation);  110.87. Take concrete steps to further reduce overcrowding of prisons, including through the increased application of alternative sentencing for juvenile offenders (Austria);  110.88. Consider incorporating the UN Rules for the Treatment of Women Prisoners and Non-Custodial Measures for Women Offenders, otherwise known as the “Bangkok Rules“ as part of its policy on the treatment of women prisoners (Thailand);  110.89. Improve programs for social reintegration of detainees (Nicaragua);  110.90. Take more effective measures to ensure that the perpetrators of acts of discrimination, hate crimes and xenophobia are adequately deterred and sanctioned (Malaysia);  110.91. Strengthen data collection and maintain disaggregated data to better understand the scale and severity of hate crimes towards women, immigrants, religious minorities, persons with disabilities, and children (United States of America);  110.92. Encourage the devolved government of Northern Ireland to increase resources and personnel available to the Historical Enquiries Team (United States of America);  110.93. Publish the conclusions of the inquiry into the death of an Angolan national during a deportation procedure in October 2010 (Angola);  110.94. Consider the possibility of raising the minimum criminal age and refrain from the practice of keeping children in custody (Belarus);  110.95. Consider the possibility of raising the age of criminal responsibility for minors (Chile);  110.96. Ensure that the best interests of the child are taken into account when arresting, detaining, sentencing or considering early release for a sole or primary carer of the child, bearing in mind that visits of a parent in prison are primarily a right of the child rather than a privilege of the prisoner that can be withdrawn as a disciplinary measure (Slovakia);  110.97. Publish the recommendations of the Leveson Inquiry on the establishment of a regulatory regime for ethical media (Angola);  110.98. Adopt necessary actions to prevent impunity and further violations of privacy committed by private media companies such as News Corporation, through hacking into telephone communications, e-mails, and voicemails (Ecuador);  110.99. Assess the impact of the minimum age limit for overseas spouses or fiancés on the prevention of forced marriage and review its policy in this regard (Slovenia);  110.100. Need to avoid the impact of the draft Defamation Bill, presented in March 2011, which restricts practicing of the freedom of opinion and expression (Iraq);  110.101. Provide more resources for reforming the welfare system in order to make it better able to tackle poverty and worklessness, and reduce negative impact on social vulnerable groups (Viet Nam);  110.102. Strengthen measures aimed at reducing serious inequalities in access to health, education and employment, which still exist despite the adoption of the Equality Act (Spain);  110.103. Guarantee the enjoyment of economic, social and cultural rights, particularly health, education and adequate housing (Cuba);  110.104. Recognize the right of access to safe drinking water and sanitation in line with GA resolution 64/292 and HRC resolution 18/1, as well as CESCR recommendations recognizing the right to sanitation as an integral part of the human right of access to safe drinking water (Spain);  110.105. Fully recognize the human right to safe drinking (Germany);  110.106. Adopt a strategy so that children of vulnerable groups are not excluded from the education system (Costa Rica);  110.107. Raise awareness campaign about rights of migrants and against racial discrimination (Bangladesh);  110.108. Strengthen governmental measures to guarantee the effective implementation of the human rights of migrants in accordance with the existing international instruments in this area (Paraguay);  110.109. Retain the Overseas Domestic Worker visa as a measure to safeguard against abuses of migrant workers (Thailand);  110.110. Strengthen national and local policies and measures to protect migrants, especially foreign workers (Viet Nam);  110.111. Continue adopting measures to prevent cases of indefinite detention of migrants, and guarantee all their rights (Chile);  110.112. Adopt necessary measures to prevent indefinite detention of migrants, and provide all legal safeguards to detained migrants (Honduras);  110.113. Adopt necessary measures to avoid criminalization of irregular migration, de-facto indefinite detention without the provision of all legal safeguards for undocumented migrants and asylum seekers (Ecuador);  110.114. In line with the British Government commitment to the universality of human rights, prohibit the indefinite detention of migrants, seek alternatives to their detention and ensure that such detention is for the shortest possible duration (Mexico);  110.115. Take necessary measures to avoid any use of detention of asylum seekers during the process of determining their refugee status (Argentina);  110.116. Establish immediate means of redress and protection of ethnic religious minorities and migrants, in particular Muslims (Iran (Islamic Republic of));  110.117. Share best practices of tackling the situation of the Roma and Traveller people through the EU Framework for National Roma Integration Strategies adopted in 2011 (Hungary);  110.118. Ensure full adherence to its international human rights obligations in its overseas counter-terrorism operations and set up comprehensive legislative and implementation frameworks for the identification, investigation, prosecution, and punishment of perpetrators of various human rights violations (Egypt);  110.119. Continue to ensure that its terrorism prevention legislation and measures comply with the international human rights standards (Japan);  110.120. Continue to review all counter-terrorism legislation and ensure that it complies with the highest human rights standards (Norway);  110.121. Steadily review the implementation of its new system of terrorism prevention and investigation to ensure the effectiveness in practice of safeguards agianst abuse and the deliberate targeting of certain ethnic groups (Netherlands);  110.122. Abandon the policy of using diplomatic assurances concerning torture and other ill-treatment as a means to avoid exposing persons to the risk of such human rights violations during any type of involuntary transfer to the territory  or the custody of another State (Nicaragua);  110.123. Legislate to restrict the detention of terror suspects without charge and ensure legality of such detention, including through action by the judicial system (Russian Federation);  110.124. Cooperate with United Nations and other international and regional mechanisms with a view to guaranteeing that the legal and administrative measures adopted to combat terrorism respect the enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms (Mexico);  110.125. Commit to investigating individuals suspected of involvement in terrorism-related activities and, where sufficient evidence exists, to prosecuting them in the ordinary criminal courts, and in conformity with international fair trial standards (Norway);  110.126. Investigate all cases of violations of human rights in all counter-terrorism settings related to lengthy secret detentions, extraordinary renditions, and the possible application of torture against individuals, and bring those responsible of such violations to justice (Belarus);  110.127. Apply, without exception, the time limit for detention of persons suspected of terrorism stipulated in the Protection of Freedoms Bill, including cases of administrative detention in emergency situations (Switzerland);  110.128. Ensure that all persons detained, also in terrorism-related cases, have access to legal counsel and are duly informed about the charges that are brought against them (Austria);  110.129. Continue its financial commitment to international development through its overseas development assistance programmes (Trinidad and Tobago);  110.130. Consider contributing to the objective of mainstreaming the right to development in its ODA programmes and policies (Bangladesh);  110.131. Play an effective role to operationalize the right to development at the international level (Pakistan);  110.132. Set up a mechanism to carry out the repatriation of funds of illicit origin and illegally acquired assets to their countries of origin and to ensure cooperation with the requesting states (Egypt). 111. All conclusions and/or recommendations contained in the present report reflect the position of the submitting State(s) and/or the State under review. They should not be construed as endorsed by the Working Group as a whole. Annex [English only]   Composition of the delegation  The delegation of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland was headed by H.E. Lord McNally, Minister of State, Ministry of Justice and composed of the following members: • H.E. Karen Pierce, Ambassador, Permanent Representative, Permanent Mission of the UK, Geneva; • Philip Tissot, Deputy Permanent Representative, Permanent Mission of the UK, Geneva; • Ian Duddy, First Secretary, Permanent Mission of the UK, Geneva; • Theo Rycroft, First Secretary, Permanent Mission of the UK, Geneva; • Amy Davis, First Secretary, Permanent Mission of the UK, Geneva; • Kate Kyriakides, Second Secretary, Permanent Mission of the UK, Geneva; • Bob Last, Senior Human Rights Adviser, Permanent Mission of the UK, Geneva; • Christopher Lomax, Third Secretary, Permanent Mission of the UK, Geneva; • Jenny Barclay, Attaché, Permanent Mission of the UK, Geneva; • Camisha Bridgeman, Lord McNally's Assistant Private Secretary; • Louise de Sousa, Head of Human Rights and Democracy Department, Foreign & Commonwealth Office; • Anna Deignan, Head of Human Rights and Security, Ministry of Justice; • Amanda Williams, Head of UN and International Team, Ministry of Justice; • Eddie Coleman, Policy Adviser, UN and International Team, Ministry of Justice; • Steven Bramley, Deputy Legal Adviser, Home Office; • Sarah Howard-Jones, Legal Adviser, Ministry of Justice; • Emma Knight, Policy Official, Ministry of Defence; • Lee Hegarty, Head of Political and Constitutional Unit, Northern Ireland Office; • Amelia John, Head of Equality Diversity and Inclusion Division, Welsh Government; • Patricia Carey, Business Planning, Co-ordination & Human Rights, Northern Ireland Executive; • Duncan Isles, Head of Human Rights, Scottish Government; • Trevor Owen, Human Rights Policy Manager, Scottish Government; • Christopher Hayes, Support Officer, UN Team, Human Rights & Democracy Department, Foreign & Commonwealth Office; and • Anette Christensen, CS Officer, Permanent Mission of the UK, Geneva.     