UNITED NATIONS A Distr.General Assembly GENERAL A/HRC/10/83 11 March 2009 Original:  ENGLISH  HUMAN RIGHTS COUNCIL Tenth session Agenda item 6 UNIVERSAL PERIODIC REVIEW  
Report of the Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review * 
Uzbekistan 
*Previously issued under document symbol A/HRC/WG.6/3/L.15; minor revisions have been added under the authority of the secretariat of the Human Rights Council, on the basis of editorial changes made by States through the ad referendum procedure. The annex to the present report is as received. GE.09-12007 CONTENTS Paragraphs Page Introduction...................................................................................................... 1 -4 3 
I. SUMMARY OF THE PROCEEDINGS OF THE REVIEW PROCESS ... 5 - 103 3 A. Presentation by the State under review.......................................... 5 -22 3 
B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review....... 23 - 103 6 
II. CONCLUSIONS AND/OR RECOMMENDATIONS.............................. 104 - 108 19 
Annex Composition of the delegation......................................................................... 26 
          A/HRC/10/83          Page 3 Introduction 1. The Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review, established in accordance with Human Rights Council resolution 5/1 of 18 June 2007, held its third session from 1 to 15 December 2008. The review of Uzbekistan was held at the 15th meeting, on 11 December 2008. The delegation of Uzbekistan was headed by H.E. Dr. Akmal SAIDOV, Chairman of the National Centre for Human Rights (level of Minister), Head of Delegation. At its meeting on 15 December 2008, the Working Group adopted the present report on Uzbekistan. 2. On 8 September 2008, the Human Rights Council selected the following group of rapporteurs (troika) to facilitate the review of Uzbekistan: Egypt, Indonesia and Nicaragua. 3. In accordance with paragraph 15 of the annex to resolution 5/1, the following documents were issued for the review of Uzbekistan: (a) A national report submitted / written presentation made in accordance with paragraph 15 (a) (A/HRC/WG.6/3/UZB/1);  (b) A compilation prepared by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR), in accordance with paragraph 15 (b) (A/HRC/WG.6/3/UZB/2); (c) A summary prepared by OHCHR, in accordance with paragraph 15 (c) (A/HRC/WG.6/3/UZB/3).  4. A list of questions prepared in advance by the Czech Republic, Denmark, Germany, Latvia and the United Kingdom of the Great Britain and Northern Ireland were transmitted to Uzbekistan through the troika. These questions are available on the extranet of the universal periodic review. I. SUMMARY OF THE PROCEEDINGS OF THE REVIEW PROCESS A. Presentation by the State under review 5. At the 15th meeting, on 11 December, the Head of Delegation of Uzbekistan, H. E. Dr. Akmal Saidov, Chairman of the National Centre for Human Rights (level of Minister) and Head of Delegation, in referring to the national report, mentioned two annexes from Uzbekistan that are posted on the OHCHR portal. He stated that Uzbekistan had taken steps to protect and promote human rights in 2008, such as the abolition of the death penalty in January and the ratification of the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. The introduction of habeas corpus was subsequently implemented in practice, as was the entry into force of the constitutional law on the role of political parties. 6. The protection of the rights of the child is a priority of state policy. The State declared 2008 the year of youth, since 40 per cent of the population of Uzbekistan is under 18 years of age and 64 per cent is under 30. The law on guarantees of children’s rights is in effect and Parliament has ratified ILO Conventions 138 and 182. The national plan of action on the implementation of these conventions includes measures to improve the legal framework and monitor the implementation of international obligations. Both Optional Protocols to the Convention on the Rights of the Child have been ratified.  7. Uzbekistan addressed the issue of law enforcement and the independence of the judiciary. To enhance the status and role of the defence lawyers as an independent civil society institution, the bar chamber was created in September 2008 along with measures to improve it. 8. Uzbekistan also addressed the issue of trafficking in persons and mentioned the law on combating trafficking in persons and the ratification of the Optional Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children, supplementing the Convention against Transnational Organized Crime. A decree on the establishment of the national rehabilitation centre to assist and protect of victims of trafficking in persons was adopted, together with the national plan of action on combating trafficking in persons for the period 2008-2010. 9. Uzbekistan mentioned how State policy in the field of human rights affects the legislation system, for example through the adoption of over 15 codes and more than 400 laws regulating fundamental rights and freedoms, and that all provisions of the international human rights treaties have been implemented in the Constitution and national legislation. 10. On human rights education, Uzbekistan mentioned that textbooks and manuals and a training course on human rights were published and introduced at all schools and universities. An advanced training programme for law enforcement officials covers human rights. Also, a national programme for refining the legal culture of society is being implemented. In the framework of the United Nations worldwide campaign on public information on human rights, wide human rights information and education activities are being carried out. More than 110 basic international legal documents on human rights have been published. A sixtieth anniversary edition of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights has been published in Uzbek. Over 20 newspapers and magazines on human rights are published. 11. Regarding civil society institutions, the delegation stated that the Government encourages the development of non-governmental organizations (NGOs), including those active in human rights, and that the policy of social partnership and the principle of transition from a strong State to a strong civil society are being implemented. It noted that NGOs provide strong support for the development of civil society and rule of law, by working in areas such as education, care for children and women, people with disabilities or suffering from illnesses and people requiring social help. 12. The delegation noted activities by mass media that form democratic and legal values among the population. There are more than 1,000 non-state newspapers, magazines and 42 television and radio companies, four news agencies and websites in Uzbekistan. 13. With regard to the implementation of its international human rights obligations, Uzbekistan expressed that its policy is accomplished through basic principles and measures developed by the United Nations. It has established close relations with Charter and treaty bodies, with special procedures of the United Nations, and has institutionalized dialogues with the European Union. As State party to more than 70 international documents on human rights, including 6 core United Nations treaties, Uzbekistan has provided 22 national reports to the treaty bodies, of which 18 have already been considered. Ten national plans of action on the implementation of the recommendations of treaty bodies are being implemented.  14. However, Uzbekistan noted certain objective problems connected with the process of transformation from the command-administrative system of governance and planned economy to the democratic system and market economy. Another problem concerned the geopolitical situation of Uzbekistan in Central Asia, a region facing many difficulties with safeguarding peace and security. It also noted the social, economic and ecological consequences of the Aral Sea crisis, which affects the population of Central Asia. 15. As subjective problems, Uzbekistan cited the low level of knowledge about human rights among the population. Uzbekistan is facing the problem of implementing international legal provisions in national legislation and practice, which requires the activity of many State bodies. In this regard, the implementation of the provisions of international law and national laws take priority. The Uzbek delegation answered to the written questions of a number of countries.  16. The Parliamentary Ombudsman Sayora Rashidova stated on the questions regarding the activities of national human rights institutions, the degree of meeting Paris standards as well as human rights defenders, that Uzbekistan established a system of national institutions of human rights on the basis of Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action, namely a Parliamentary Ombudsman, a national human rights centre and institute for monitoring legislation. The Uzbek model in human rights national institutions fully complies with Paris principles. The Parliamentary Ombudsman established in 1995, the first in the Commonwealth of Independent States, is constitutionally independent body and annually submits a report to Parliament. 17. Under the Ombudsman’s office, there is a commission on the observance of constitutional rights and freedoms. Its composition is approved by both chambers of Parliament. Members of the Ombudsman’s office are prominent public figures, academics and representatives of NGOs. 18. The national centre for human rights was founded in October 1996 and implements national plans of action and national program in the area of human rights and freedoms. The Institution of monitoring of current legislation established in 1996, basic tasks are to carry out legal expertise of bills and draft laws, to control that the legislation of Uzbekistan is in compliance with international norms and standards and others. 19. The NGOs are actively protecting human rights in Uzbekistan. The partnership, constructive relations and collaboration between the authorities and NGOs facilitate development of civil society and rule of law.  20. Also there is no specific legal status of human rights defenders in legislation, virtually each NGO (they are more than 5,000) carries out legal human rights work related to the human rights of children, disabled, women or vulnerable members of population. The state provides support for establishment of these NGOs and they participate directly in protection of human rights of their members and of the population as a whole.  There is preparation for round table discussion the legal status of human right defender. 21. The Deputy Minister of Justice said that Uzbekistan pays attention to civil society; in particular they participated directly in the preparations of the report for UPR. Registration of NGOs is carried out by the Ministry of Justice in accordance with national law on NGOs which is in full compliance with international standards. Every NGO can be registered if its aims and goals do not contradict the Constitution of Uzbekistan. The national report to UPR was discussed in the special interagency meeting where 32 different ministries and state departments partcipiated along with NGOs. 22. Religious freedom is enshrined in the Constitution and is being supported by the state policy of religious tolerance. In Uzbekistan there are more than 120 ethnicities and 16 religious denominations. The right to freedom of religion is being implemented. 2,229 religious organizations are registered in Uzbekistan, such as Muslims, Christians, Russian Orthodox, Baptists, Evangelists, Seventh Day Adventists, Lutherans, Roman Catholics, Armenian Apostolic, Protestants, Jehovah’s Witnesses, as well as eight Jewish societies, Hare Krishnas, Buddhists and Baha’is. The Koran been translated into Uzbek as have the New Testament and other religious texts, also Koran in Braille. Much attention is paid to religious education. The Tashkent Islamic University is providing such education. All religious festivals are celebrated in Uzbekistan. Many Uzbeks had opportunity to travel to Saudi Arabia for the hajj. Tashkent was proclaimed by the Islamic Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization as the City of Islamic Culture for 2007. B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review 23. A total of 55 delegations participated in the interactive dialogue.  24. Many delegations commended Uzbekistan for its commitment to the universal periodic review and the dialogue with the Council. They welcomed the participation of its high-level delegation, its thorough and comprehensive presentation and the answers to the written questions. The national report submitted was noted with satisfaction as reflecting the progress made in the democratic renewal of the country.  25. Reference was made to the significant step by Uzbekistan to bolster the role of Parliament, political parties and civil society in the promotion of human rights, its ratification of several United Nations conventions, the second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, and ILO Conventions 138 and 182 concerning the prohibition of child labour and the adoption of a 2007-2011 national programme to enhance children’s well.being, the special 2007 law on guarantees of children’s rights, and legislative and practical measures to combat trafficking in persons. 26. Reference was made to the tireless efforts of Uzbekistan to promote and protect human rights, despite numerous difficulties and challenges. It was noted that Uzbekistan continues to make efforts to eliminate discrimination against women and children, increase the impact of women in decision-making processes, promote the right to education and spread a culture of human rights through human rights awareness campaigns, including the national action programme on the sixtieth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.  27. The cooperation of Uzbekistan with OHCHR and United Nations treaty bodies was noted with appreciation, as was the establishment of the Human Rights Commissioner of the Parliament and the national centre for human rights. Reference was made to the progress in ensuring civil and political rights and the adoption of various laws on political parties, NGOs, freedom of conscience and religious organizations and the media. The adoption of the new 2007 constitutional law was commended as strengthening the role of political parties.  28. Uzbekistan was also commended for its declaration that it will spare no effort to establish a judicial framework enabling the effective punishment for acts of torture. It was noted that Uzbekistan has made commendable efforts following the recommendations of the Special Rapporteur on torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment after his visit in 2002. 29. The recent release of political prisoners and the acceptance of visits of International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) teams to Uzbek detention centres, the steady growth of NGOs and media, the abolition of the death penalty and the introduction of the habeas corpus procedure and the decision of the Government to establish the institute of the Children’s Ombudsman were also welcomed.  30. Uzbekistan was commended for its efforts to guarantee the rule of law and provide its economic and social programmes with a human dimension. It was also commended for the dedication of a significant portion of its GDP to education leading to tremendous progress in the area of education and a 99 per cent literacy rate in 2003, which is an important step towards the effective realization of economic, cultural and social rights for its citizens. 31. The Russian Federation stated that the impact of important adopted State decisions (a more liberal and humane legal and court system, and a broad educative work for disseminating human rights) produced tangible results. It enquired whether Uzbekistan has a special court for juveniles and whether Uzbekistan has identified any tangible tasks and aims in human rights.  32. France recommended that Uzbekistan (a) adopt a national legislation complying with international human rights standards to ensure freedom of assembly, as enshrined in the Constitution, particularly by guaranteeing human rights NGOs the right to carry out their activities freely; (b) broaden the area of freedom of the media, particularly by eliminating restrictions on foreign and national media and adopting more flexible rules for the accreditation of foreign journalists; and (c) take all necessary measures to prevent acts of torture and other cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment or punishment particularly in places of detention, ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and establish a national independent mechanism to monitor all places of detention. France noted that religious communities must be registered with the Government to be able to fully carry out their activities. France recommended that Uzbekistan (d) implement effectively its commitments relating to freedom of religion as contained in the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights to which Uzbekistan is a party. 33. Chile recommended that Uzbekistan (a) establish conditions that would allow for an international and independent investigation to establish the facts concerning Andijan; and (b) end the practice of forced return of persons who sought asylum in bordering States after the events in Andijan. Those that have been forcefully returned and are still detained in undisclosed places should be immediately released. Information should be provided on the whereabouts of the 13 disappeared persons that were returned from Kyrgyzstan and whose situation was in due time reported to the Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances. It further recommended that Uzbekistan, owing to the multiple allegations of massive use of torture and ill treatment of detainees, (c) adopt a definition of torture in accordance with article 1 of the Convention; (d) ensure that the judiciary has the necessary independence from the executive branch, limiting the attributions of the latter to the appointment of judges, in particular to the Supreme Court; (e) ensure the exercise of freedom of expression, assembly, association and the right to participate in public and political life, lifting all restrictions on local and foreign press to investigate and freely inform about the national reality, and particularly about the events in Andijan. 34. The Netherlands recommended that (a) everyone, including human rights defenders, can peacefully exercise their right to freedom of expression in conformity with obligations under the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. The Netherlands recommended that Uzbekistan (b) investigate all reports of assaults on and harassment of human rights defenders and bring to justice those responsible; (c) take practical measures to ensure the absolute prohibition of torture in line with national and international law obligations and report about the results in the next round of the universal periodic review; (d) fully respect the freedom of religion or belief ,as also expressed in the recommendations of the Human Rights Committee; and (e) ensure regular inspection of harvesting practices, to monitor and guarantee full compliance with international child labour standards and consider cooperation with international organizations in this respect . 35. Italy recommended that Uzbekistan adopt adequate measures for the protection and promotion of religious freedom, in order to ensure an effective freedom of worship of all religious communities. It recommended that Uzbekistan comply with its international obligations in this field, and ensure the right to seek, receive and provide information and ideas, including by electronic means and from foreign sources. Italy also recommended that Uzbekistan effectively fight against child labour, including by considering taking specific administrative and penal actions towards those officials who, in their respective provinces, incentivize or facilitate the labour of children in cotton fields. 36. Bahrain noted that the protection and promotion of the rights of women and children continues to be one of the main priorities of Uzbekistan and several plans of action have been adopted to prevent the exploitation of children. Bahrain asked for clarification on allegations by human rights organizations of child labour in the plantation field and asked about measures taken to prevent children from entering the labour market that would endanger their health and education and how ILO Conventions 182 and 138 were implemented to address this problem. 37. Oman noted that that a national action plan has been drawn up for 2007-11 requesting more information on this action plan. Oman asked about measures taken to guarantee the rights of the disabled, especially children and to provide them with access to basic services.  38. The United Arab Emirates noted that Uzbekistan has ratified the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children and enquired about Uzbekistan’s plans and governmental structures responsible for its implementation and the role of NGOs in this process. 39. Finland asked about the Uzbek government’s plans to implement laws prohibiting forced and child labour. Finland recommended (a) that the Uzbek Government allow independent investigations of labour rights abuses and (b) implement the ILO Conventions concerning the Minimum Age for Admission to Employment and the Prohibition and Immediate Action for the Elimination of the Worst Forms of Child Labour. 40. Azerbaijan recommended continuing the practice of adopting national plans of action to improve the human rights situation in the country as well as to implement some of the recommendations of the United Nations treaty bodies. Azerbaijan asked if Uzbekistan considers becoming a party to the Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families and asked for a timeframe for that step. 41. Denmark recommended that Uzbekistan (a) step up its efforts to eradicate impunity for torture and other ill-treatment and to initiate thorough, impartial and independent investigations into all such allegations, and that all alleged perpetrators be brought to justice; (b) consider giving priority to the training of law enforcement officials regarding the treatment of detainees; (c) take immediate measures to ensure the absolute prohibition of torture in line with international legal obligations; (d) seriously considers extending an invitation to the Special Rapporteur on the question of torture; and (e) consider acceding to the OP-CAT in the near future. 42. China referred to the legislation to guarantee equal rights between women and men and to prohibit all forms of discrimination and endeavours to handle ethnic and religious relations. China appreciated that since independence there has been no ethnic or religious conflict in Uzbekistan. China asked about Uzbekistan’s priorities for human rights education and programs on human rights education established for government officials in the judiciary, particularly law enforcement officials. Noting the Government’s designation of 2009 as the year for human rights knowledge, China asked about envisaged measures. China suggested widely disseminating programs of human rights and public documents in an easily understandable form. 43. Austria noted concerns expressed by the General Assembly and the Secretary-General and the special procedures and treaty bodies regarding restrictions on freedom of expression and activities of civil society. It noted concerns about the prosecution, penalization and imprisonment of human rights defenders. Austria expressed interest in additional measures to be implemented in accordance with Uzbekistan’s obligations under international human rights law to safeguard a free, independent and pluralist media and functioning human rights organizations. Austria recommended that (a) any restrictions on the activities of civil society be lifted and safeguards implemented to prevent human rights defenders from being prosecuted for their peaceful activities. Austria recommended that (b) all necessary efforts be made to ensure prompt, thorough, independent and impartial investigations into allegations of torture or other forms of ill-treatment as required by international human rights law. Austria recommended that (c) adequate reparation be provided to victims of torture in accordance with international human rights obligations. 44. Underlining the important role of human rights defenders, Belgium asked about the composition and the mandate of the national association for non-governmental and non-profit organizations. It recommended that Uzbekistan reinforce the protection of human rights defenders and free those who are still detained in their capacity as human rights defenders. 45. Germany noted CAT’s indication that the current definition of torture restricts the prohibited practice of torture to the actions of law enforcement officials and does not cover acts by ‘other persons acting in an official capacity’. Germany recommended that the Government take steps to address the issue and broaden the definition of torture in a way to encompass all cases of torture by all persons acting in an official capacity. Germany recommended that the Government of Uzbekistan immediately cease all public support for the employment of children in cotton harvesting and that the Government publicly condemn and effectively combat all forms of child labour. 46. Japan expressed concerns at reported continued torture and inhuman treatment by law enforcement and investigation officials, despite Uzbekistan’s efforts to educate such officials about the Convention against Torture. Japan noted that treaty bodies referred to abuses and deaths in custody, particularly degrading treatment or punishment before formal charges are made and that the Special Rapporteur on torture has yet to receive comprehensive evidence that Uzbekistan is combating impunity for torture. Japan recommended that Uzbekistan accept the request of the Special Rapporteur on torture to visit the country. Japan enquired about current and planned specific measures to bring about improvements to combat child labour and more concretely to rescue victims. Japan noted the treaty bodies’ concern regarding limited independent monitoring of human rights and the General Assembly’s concern at increased restrictions of freedom of expression, including harassment and arrests. Japan urged the Government to take specific and concrete measures to protect freedom of expression and to prohibit censorship in a more effective manner.  47. The United Kingdom recommended that Uzbekistan (a) implement the Committee’s recommendations to ensure that the absolute prohibition of torture is observed, guarantee access of detainees to lawyers and their families, and establish independent mechanisms for complaints and for monitoring conditions in places of detention. It recommended that (b) Uzbekistan ratify the OP-CAT and take the necessary measures at the national level to do so. The United Kingdom called upon Uzbekistan to refrain from the prosecution of those seeking to exercise their freedom of religion or belief and to safeguard personal access to and use and ownership of religious literature and materials. It recommended that (c) Uzbekistan introduce a simpler registration process for religious organizations than currently exists, and that (d) it establish a national human rights institution in compliance with the Paris Principles. 48. Mexico recommended (a) considering extending an open standing invitation to special procedures and allowing the visits requested previously by six special rapporteurs and the Working Group on Arbitrary Detention. Mexico recommended that the Criminal Code be amended to ensure that the definition of torture and the severity of penalties are in full compliance with the Convention. Mexico recommended considering the ratification of the Optional Protocol to CAT and the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court. Mexico asked if a state of emergency is put in place. If so, Mexico recommended that Uzbekistan ensure compliance with article 4 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the general observation number 29 of the Human Rights Committee on state of emergencies. Mexico recommended promoting and protecting human rights and fundamental freedoms by applying the measures stipulated in the law to combat terrorism, drug trafficking and other threats against the national security, and clarifying in an impartial and independent manner, with the support of the international human rights mechanisms, the events that occurred in Andijan in 2005. 49. Slovakia recommended that Uzbekistan consider the ratification of the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court. Noting the importance attached by Uzbekistan to the strengthening of cooperation with the Council and the special procedures, the OHCHR, and other United Nations human rights bodies, Slovakia recommended that Uzbekistan respond positively to the visit request of the seven thematic special procedures. Slovakia recommended that Uzbekistan allow ICRC access to detention facilities in accordance with ICRC standard working procedures also beyond the trial period. Slovakia expressed concern about the reported involvement of school-age children in the harvest of cotton in Uzbekistan, mentioned by the CRC and the CESCR. Slovakia enquired about the planned creation of a Children’s Ombudsman among national priorities, including a timeframe and steps taken so far. 50. Spain raised five questions to be also considered as recommendations. Spain enquired about Uzbekistan’s readiness to continue to make progress regarding the (a) liberation of all human rights defenders who remain in prison and about the situation of Solijon Abdurakhmanov and Agzam Turgunov. It enquired about Uzbekistan’s readiness (b) to eliminate restrictions on the activities of human rights NGOs, and wished to know whether restrictions continue to be imposed on the activities of Human Rights Watch. It enquired about Uzbekistan’s readiness to cooperate in an effective manner with the Special Rapporteur on torture and the Special Rapporteur on freedom of opinion and expression. Spain wished to know the plans of Uzbekistan to liberalize the work of mass media, and whether it is prepared to draw a clear distinction between the legitimate fight against terrorism and strict respect for freedom of religion.  51. While making reference to a number of steps taken to address concerns about the human rights situation, including the abolition of the death-penalty and the introduction of habeas corpus, Ireland asked if statistics were available on the use of habeas corpus and if the number of persons in prisons have fallen since its introduction. Noting a number of reports after his visit to the country in late 2002 by the Special Rapporteur on torture, Ireland asked changes to be made to improve the situation. Ireland recommended that Uzbekistan adopt a zero-tolerance approach to the continuing problem of torture, and to the practice of impunity, as recommended by CAT and the Special Rapporteur. 52. Ireland recommended that Uzbekistan urgently facilitate the request by the Special Rapporteur on human rights defenders to make a country visit, and implement the recommendations made by the Committee against Torture on human rights defenders. Ireland asked about steps taken to make it easier for NGOs and the media to operate without interference. Ireland asked if the new opposition parties will be allowed to register and operate freely and the progress being made in implementing OSCE/ODIHR recommendations made after the last election. Ireland recommended that Uzbekistan lift all restrictions on the activities of civil society and comply with the request by the Human Rights Committee to bring its law, regulations and practice governing the registration of political parties into line with the ICCPR.  53. The head of delegation Dr. Akmal Saidov stated that the delegation would seek to answer thoroughly to questions raised. 54. With regards to torture and habeas corpus, the delegation (Deputy General Prosecutor) noted that thorough work on these issues has enabled Uzbekistan to almost fully implement recommendations of United Nations bodies. It referred to a statement of the President who acknowledged the existence of intimidations by law enforcement officials but made clear that the use of force in police investigations and arrests cannot be allowed. It emphasised efforts of law enforcement bodies in monitoring investigations, arrests and custody in conformity with international standards. It also stated that pamphlets have been distributed among the population indicating citizen’s rights with regards to detention.  55. It stated that access to a lawyer is available for all detainees and that a 24 hours lawyer’s service exists. 56. As to the prohibition of torture, the delegation stated that the principle of inadmissibility of evidence obtained under torture is enshrined in national legislation and complaints about torture could be a basis to reverse criminal sentences. An independent body to consider torture complaints has been established. Further measures are envisaged to ensure that evidence in trials on alleged cases of torture is objective. It stated that from 2004 to 2008 20 criminal cases have been brought to court to prosecute 38 law-enforcement officials accused of torture, which were convicted in accordance with article 235 of the Criminal Code. It also noted that in 2009 discussions with United Nations experts will take place on the question whether the definition of torture in national legislation needs to be amended. Furthermore it underlined that a national action plan has been elaborated to implement recent recommendations of CAT. Additionally, it referred to activities of monitoring of law enforcement bodies by NGOs and its impact on preventing human rights violations. 57. The delegation stressed that the ICCPR provisions on habeas corpus have been included in national legislation providing for early access to lawyers, which allows identifying abuse or torture at early stages, and the consequent changes in custody and criminal procedure.  58. Concerning trafficking in human beings, the delegation noted the adoption of a law on trafficking in 2008 and of an action plan for 2008-2009, as well as the existence of an Interdepartmental Commission on trafficking, composed of members of State bodies and NGOs. The delegation further referred to the measures adopted to raise awareness and prevent trafficking, including television spots, information events, press statements and the distribution of pamphlets in all regions of Uzbekistan, including ticket offices and tourist agencies. Additionally, a rehabilitation centre for victims of trafficking has been established in 2008. 59. With regards to child labour, the delegation noted that this practice is addressed through the legal prohibition of labour of children under 14 and through educational measures. The fact that legislation allows 14-16 year old children to work, subject to restrictive conditions, was considered in line with ILO Conventions 138 and 182. It cited measures taken concerning education and information on child labour in cooperation with UNICEF and ILO, in particular the publication of a collection of relevant ILO conventions and of a manual on ILO Convention 182. It also referred to national legislation implementing relevant ILO Conventions and the awareness-raising of parliamentarians on ILO standards. A national action plan for the implementation of ILO conventions 138 and 182 was adopted. 60. As to questions concerning child labour in the cotton harvest, the delegation emphasised that the employment of children is not a state policy and that the cotton is produced by the private sector. However, as a result of an increase of export prices of cotton some foreign companies who used to buy Uzbek cotton at low price were angered and are now complaining about child labour. 61. Concerning questions on human rights education, the delegation stressed that the Millennium Development Goals are being implemented and that the goal of achieving universal primary education has been achieved. It also referred to the extensive reform of the education system in cooperation with relevant international organisations. It stated that human rights education is made available, on an ongoing basis, from preschool to adult education, for example, through human rights courses for State and law enforcement officials and the general population. It also recalled its previous initiatives to elaborate an international declaration on human rights education and affirmed its readiness to cooperate in this regard. 62. Belarus recommended that the Government continue to pursue a policy ensuring that there is no distortion in the development of economic, social, cultural, civil and political rights. This is the only way in which one can really guarantee rights of all sectors and categories of the population. Belarus wished best success for Uzbekistan and expressed hope that Uzbekistan would maintain the momentum for the positive protection of human rights in this and in the next universal periodic review. 63. While welcoming the reduction of crowding in places of detention and the adoption of habeas corpus provisions, Hungary remained concerned at the many reports of the widespread use of torture and ill-treatment of detainees, among them hundreds of participants in the Andijan demonstrations. Hungary recommended that Uzbekistan improve the conditions of detention, renew access of ICRC to prisons, grant access to the announced visits of independent experts to places of detention, and guarantee detainees their fundamental rights, especially the right of access to a lawyer. Hungary requested more information on the intentions of Uzbekistan to improve the living conditions and legal protection of persons with disabilities. It recommended that Uzbekistan adopt a law on equal rights and equal opportunities to protect the vulnerable, namely children, women and people with disabilities. It further recommended the reopening of the UNHCR Office in Uzbekistan.  64. Ukraine recommended that Uzbekistan strengthen cooperation with the special procedures of the Human Rights Council; extend invitations to the thematic special procedures; and respond to questionnaires of the mandate holders in due time. Ukraine noted a 2007 UNDP report on improvements in the health status of the population and the CESCR’s recommendation that Uzbekistan address the rural and urban disparities in health-care provision and that Uzbekistan take measures to prevent and combat the spread of HIV/AIDS. Ukraine expressed interest in the recent measures taken to ensure human rights in the ecological crisis zone. Ukraine recommended using appropriate international experience in this area. 65. Canada recommended that (a) Uzbekistan establish an independent international commission of inquiry tasked with the investigation in relation to the events of May 2005 in Andijan and to prosecute and punish all those responsible for human rights violations. Canada recommended that (b) the Uzbek Government ensure compliance with international child labour standards, including ILO Convention 182 on the Elimination of the Worst Forms of Child Labour and collaborate with ILO to that effect and implement the relevant recommendations of the Committee on the Rights of the Child and the Human Rights Committee. Canada recommended that (c) Uzbekistan take effective measures to eliminate the use of torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, investigate and prosecute all those responsible. Canada further recommended that (d) Uzbekistan release all detained human rights defenders and political prisoners. Canada recommended that (e) Uzbekistan keep all places of detention under systematic review. Canada recommended that Uzbekistan maintain continued and unfettered access by the ICRC to detention facilities following the agreement reached in March 2008. Canada recommended that (f) Uzbekistan adopt measures to prevent any harassment or intimidation of all those exercising the right to freedom of opinion and expression, including journalists and human rights defenders. Canada recommended that (g) Uzbekistan ensure that its legislation and practice fully respect article 19 of the ICCPR. Canada recommended that (h) Uzbekistan take effective measures to combat violence against women and ensure the full and equal enjoyment by women of all human rights without discrimination. 66. Poland recommended that Uzbekistan take effective measures to ensure the full implementation of ILO Conventions 182 and 138, and that it stop the practice of sending school-age children to participate in the harvesting of cotton. Poland recommended that Uzbekistan ratify the OP-CAT; that it improve conditions of places of detention; that it ensure in practice better access of every detainee to lawyers, medical treatment and family members and other legal guarantees to ensure protection from torture; and that it allow full access of the ICRC to all places of detention. 67. Switzerland recommended Uzbekistan to do its utmost to eliminate forced child labour and to intensify its efforts to effectively implement the national legislation, in particular the labour code of 1996, and international conventions ratified by the Government on this subject. Switzerland recommended following the recommendations made by the Committee against Torture to adopt all necessary measures to combat impunity. Switzerland recommended inviting the Special Rapporteur on torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment to examine the question of the possible use of torture and to extend a standing invitation to all special procedures of the Council. Switzerland recommended that Uzbekistan strengthen its collaboration with national and international civil society actors, notably by giving general accreditation to the major international human rights organizations. Switzerland recommends making (a) a humanitarian gesture by liberating prisoners for political and religious offenses who are in serious health condition. 68. Sweden recommended that the Government take appropriate legislative and policy measures in order to guarantee full respect of human rights, including in the fight against terrorism. Sweden noted that Uzbekistan is a state party to CAT, but has not signed the OP-CAT. Sweden remains concerned about reports indicating that the use of torture in places of detention in Uzbekistan is to be regarded as “systematic”. Sweden recommended that the Government sign the OP- CAT and increase its efforts in order to eliminate the occurrence of torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment in places of detention. 69. Nicaragua congratulated Uzbekistan for its efforts to provide its economic and social programmes with a human dimension. It recommended that Uzbekistan continue giving priority to education programmes, contributing to the strengthening of the democratization process.  70. In view of the still pending requests by special procedures mandate holders to visit Uzbekistan, Latvia recommended Uzbekistan to step up cooperation with the special procedures and eventually consider extending a standing invitation to all special procedures of the Council. 71. Algeria enquired about what measures have been taken to implement the Millennium Development Goals in the school environment and what prospects are there for further developments in inclusive education. Algeria recommended that Uzbekistan accede to the 1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees. Algeria recommended that the international community step up its technical assistance for enhancing Uzbekistan’s capacities to combat organized crimes, terrorism, drug trafficking. 72. Noting that the national report frankly acknowledges challenges faced in keeping pace between the legislative reforms and the socio-economic and cultural makeup of the country as well as the requirements between national security and threats of terrorism, religious extremism and drug trafficking, Pakistan wished to know how Uzbekistan intends to address these threats while ensuring the promotion and protection of human rights and asked whether it would need assistance in this regard. Pakistan hoped that Uzbekistan will continue its active cooperation with the relevant human rights mechanisms at all levels. 73. Egypt recommended that the Government (a) continue with international support its efforts to complete its human rights architecture and for the spreading of a human rights culture in Uzbekistan, as well as providing the necessary training and capacity building to law enforcement and the members of the judiciary in the area of human rights; (b) disseminate the outcome of the review through the national mass media in order to inform the public at large of its presentation made today, the achievements made and recommendations which are going to be implemented in the next period; and (c) adopt and strengthen existing measures to prevent and combat trafficking in women.  74. Cuba requested more information on the measures adopted by the Government to protect socially vulnerable children, on the results achieved from this monitoring programme and how findings are used to improve the situation of children. Cuba recommended that Uzbekistan continue positive efforts already under way to improve economic, social and cultural rights. Cuba recommended that Uzbekistan pursue positive endeavours aimed at promoting and protecting the rights of women, including through the strengthening of the measures already taken to prevent and combat trafficking in women. Cuba recommended that Uzbekistan continue with positive work already under way to ensure the progress of the rights of children and the full wellbeing. 75. The Philippines recommended that inter-ministerial coordination be strengthened with regard to the activities of law enforcement agencies and implementation of measures to protect human rights and fundamental freedoms. Commending Uzbekistan for the dedication of a significant portion of its GDP to education, which has resulted in a near 100 per cent literacy rate, the Philippines recommended that it continue to dedicate resources to promoting the right to education and the rights of children. Finally, the Philippines enquired about measures implemented to improve gender equality and protection of the rights of women, in particular about developments regarding the law on equal rights and equal opportunities for men and women. 76. Malaysia sought clarification on the current status of Uzbekistan’s engagement with the United Nations and other relevant human rights monitoring mechanisms. Malaysia recommended that Uzbekistan (a) strengthen and deepen interaction with relevant international human rights mechanisms; (b) continue efforts to combat trafficking in women and children, by fully implementing the recently passed law of April 2008, on countering trafficking in persons; (c) step up existing efforts to implement human rights education and training across all levels of society; and (d) continue its efforts in promoting and nurturing a vibrant civil society. 77. India noted the reforms recently introduced and was pleased to learn that in recent years Uzbekistan has dedicated more than 50 per cent of its budget towards social development and more than 30 per cent to education. India welcomed the policy of free education and that of imparting human rights education in schools. 78. Indonesia commended Uzbekistan for recent efforts to enhance guarantees protecting the rights of the child, including in addition to the ratification of the Convention on the Rights of the Child, the adoption of a 2007-2011 national programme to enhance children’s well-being and the special 2007 law on guarantees of child rights. 79. The Czech Republic recommended: (a) the introduction of an awareness raising programme aimed at informing about positive contributions of persons with disabilities together with further measures to enhance their participation in decision-making processes; (b) that Uzbekistan continue to allow unfettered regular access of the ICRC to detention and prison facilities; (c) to accede to the OP CAT and establish its national preventive mechanism accordingly; (d) the decriminalization of consensual same-sex activity between adults and the adoption of measures to promote tolerance in this regard; (e) to adopt and implement measures to prevent abuse of provisions of criminal law for persecution of human rights defenders, (f) to release political prisoners; (g) to ensure punishment of persons responsible for serious violations of human rights and; (h) to ensure also thorough, independent and impartial investigation of all previous serious violations of human right, including the tragic event of May 2005 in Andijan.  80. Argentina noted reports of NGOs, CESCR and CEDAW indicating a persistent and entrenched cultural stereotype concerning the role of women in society. Argentina recommended that Uzbekistan consider the possibility of adopting legislation which will promote gender equality and also consider the adoption of legislation to provide equality of rights and opportunities. Argentina expressed concern with regard to discrimination in the labour sphere with lower pay levels for women. Argentina noted the information of the ILO Committee of Experts in 2008 that women’s work is concentrated in certain jobs and sectors and women are more affected by dismissals than men and they more frequently have more problems in obtaining new jobs after periods of unemployment. Argentina suggested that Uzbekistan consider the possibility of reviewing these practices and also the idea of implementing labour inspections by qualified professionals and with appropriate funding. 81. The Syrian Arab Republic highlighted the adoption of the law against trafficking in persons in 2008. It enquired about the extent to which the legislative and institutional framework provides for the protection of the rights of children, and about the level of empowerment of women and their representation in senior posts in executive bodies, including the parliament. 82. South Africa asked if there are any plans to develop a national action plan on human rights and if more information could be provided on measures to address the challenges of child labour and the success of such interventions. It further asked if there are any programmes in place to deal with the challenges of poverty eradication and high unemployment rate. South Africa recommended that Uzbekistan establish a National Human Rights Institution and accelerate its poverty alleviation programmes. 83. The Islamic Republic of Iran considered particularly initiatives taken for human rights education as an important step to further promotion and protection of human rights. Iran noted that the decision to establish a Children Ombudsman is an important step to better protect the rights of the child. It recommended that Uzbekistan use all appropriate means to further develop and strengthen a culture of human rights, create more human rights capacity-building and promote human rights education and public awareness-raising with a view to better promoting and protecting of all human rights.  84. Brazil enquired about measures envisaged for the implementation of CAT, measures taken to address domestic violence against women, and whether there are some areas where technical assistance would be welcomed by Uzbekistan. Brazil recommended that Uzbekistan fully implement the national strategy to fight against child labour and to promote descent work; that it ratify the OP-CAT and the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court; and that it reach the human rights goals set out by the Council in its resolution 9/12. 85. Viet Nam asked the delegation to provide more information on measures that the country will take to strengthen social policies. It recommended that Uzbekistan continue its efforts in the areas of human rights education and dissemination.  86. Saudi Arabia stated that Uzbekistan provides education and healthcare to children and that statistics reveal the decline in child mortality rates. It recommended that Uzbekistan promote legislation that is in conformity with UNICEF and ILO standards regarding the rights of the child. 87. Norway remained concerned about reports about intimidation, restrictions and imprisonment of human rights defenders. In line with the recommendations of CAT, Norway recommended (a) that Uzbekistan ensure that human rights defenders are protected from unjust imprisonment, intimidation and violence and that it release those imprisoned or sentenced for carrying out peaceful human rights advocacy. Noting with concern alleged difficulties in obtaining registration for domestic and international NGOs, Norway recommended that (b) all registration procedures be applied fairly and without discrimination and in conformity with international standards. It enquired whether Uzbekistan intends to undertake any legislative reform in this regard. Norway also recommended that (c) Uzbekistan consider issuing an invitation the Special Rapporteur on human rights defenders.  88. Slovenia asked (a) what steps the Government was taking to ensure that all individuals with a conscientious objection to military service are able to exercise this right and not only those belonging to recognized religious groups whose beliefs require such refusal; (b) the  State’s plans to improve the conditions in which children live and to improve the protection of children; (c) when Uzbekistan planned to respond to all pending requests by special procedures to visit the country, positively, and whether Uzbekistan considered issuing a standing invitation to special procedures. Slovenia recommended that Uzbekistan (d) ensure that conscientious objection to military service is available to individuals irrespective of their religion or belief, that the process for consideration applications is under civilian control and to provide a non-punitive civilian alternative service; (b) respond soon to these requests (of special procedures to visit the country) in a positive way. 89. The Republic of Korea, along with the CEDAW, CERD, and CAT, welcomed Uzbekistan’s initiative to come up with national plans of action to implement treaty bodies’ recommendations. It noted that the international community remains concerned over the situation of human rights of Uzbekistan in some domains, including torture, ill-treatment of detainees and violence against women. The Republic of Korea recommended that Uzbekistan, in an effort to demonstrate its genuine engagement with international human rights mechanisms, should favourably consider the further cooperation with the special procedures, including acceptance of requests for country visit made by several special rapporteurs since 2007.  90. Palestine referred to policies to reform the political, judicial and legal system, which reflect Uzbekistan’s interest in promoting human rights. Palestine recommended that Uzbekistan develop its legislation in order to meet the basic development needs of the country in its transitional period. 91. Qatar commended Uzbekistan for prohibiting capital punishment which has lead to commuting de facto capital sentences to life sentences or long prison sentences. Uzbekistan is also commended for paying particular attention to people in special need, such as persons with disabilities, women and children. Qatar noted that Uzbekistan continues to further such efforts to protect and promote human rights and fundamental freedoms. 92. Morocco expressed interest in actions taken regarding the realization of objective 6 of the MDG aimed at combating HIV/AIDS, malaria and other diseases. Morocco enquired about cooperation programmes established particularly in conjunction with international cooperation agencies and actions undertaken to ensure the population is aware of these programmes. Morocco recommended that Uzbekistan continue to work closely with civil society to fight the propagation of HIV/AIDS, without which the sixth objective of the MDGs will be difficult to achieve. 93. Nigeria noted that more needs to be done, in particular in the area of the juvenile justice system and access to basic health services, especially in prisons. Nigeria called upon the international community to provide urgently the needed assistance to Uzbekistan in support of its efforts, as well as eventual implementation of recommendations that may come out of the review. 94. Bangladesh recommended that Uzbekistan: (a) continue to improve living standards, access for basic services such as health and education with full support and cooperation of the international community; (b) continue to engage with the United Nations human rights mechanisms in a constructive manner.  95. Afghanistan noted Uzbekistan is state part to the CEDAW and the ILO Convention on the Protection of Motherhood. Afghanistan enquired about measures taken to implement the stated international treaties and secure gender equality and create favourable conditions for comprehensive development of women.  96. With regards to the penitentiary system and the cooperation with the ICRC, the delegation referred to the policy of “humanising” the prison system and liberation of criminal legislation and stated that currently out of 100 000 citizens, 134 are inmates. After the signing of the 2001 agreement between Uzbekistan and the ICRC on humanitarian activities for detainees, prisons have been regularly visited by foreign and domestic NGOs, media representatives and diplomats. The ICRC visited detention facilities in more than 115 instances, with 19 visits in 2008. The cooperation between those bodies has been extended to human rights education for detainees. 97. As to questions on the terrorist attacks in Andijan (May, 2005), the delegation (Deputy General Prosecutor) pointed out that the group of terrorist had committed a number of military attacks on government and law-enforcement sites followed by murder, seizure of weapons and ammunition, taking hostages, release from the prison dangerous criminals. These events are immediate aggression from international terrorism against the state, which aimed at spreading destabilisation on the Ferghana Valley and Central Asia as a whole. The government had done everything it could to ensure a peaceful resolution and that the use of force by the law-enforcement agencies was provoked by armed terrorists and was of reciprocal nature against armed terrorists’ forcible actions. It rejected statements that the use of force was “and excessive disproportionate” as unfounded, as confirmed by court investigations. It pointed out that the EU experts have visited Uzbekistan in 2006 and 2007 to study case files and meet government officials, converse with those condemned, their lawyers and witnesses of the events. It reaffirmed that the position of Uzbekistan remains strong and is not to be changed. It is not acceptable for Uzbekistan to conduct a so-called “independent international inquiry” into the Andijan events. This issue is closed for Uzbekistan. 98. To questions concerning children’s rights, the delegation drew attention to a bill on the child’s ombudsman, the cooperation with UNICEF to create a juvenile justice system, the drafting of a law on juvenile justice, and the reformulation of the law on juvenile policy. It noted that the law on the rights of the child includes a specific chapter with additional guarantees for socially vulnerable children, such as integration into society, rights to housing, social assistance and education. 99. As to economic, social and cultural rights, the delegation noted the particular attention Uzbekistan gives to such rights, while fully endorsing the universality, indivisibility and inalienability of human rights. It cited figures according to which 54.6 per cent of the State budget for 2009 is allocated to the social sphere, of which one third is allocated to education. 100. With regards to measures in the field of health, the delegation mentioned as examples the state policy and 9 national programmes to protect maternal and child health, laws on the prevention of HIV/AIDS, psychotropic substances, psychiatric health, protection from tuberculosis, blood donation and various therapies and preventive medical approaches. The increase in life expectancy and the decrease of the discrepancy between male and female life expectancy was cited as an effect of the reformed medical system. 101. In the area of women’s rights, the delegation stressed the existence of a gender equality policy and the close cooperation with CEDAW in implementing the provisions of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, as well as the draft law on equal opportunities and rights for men and women. It further noted that Uzbekistan is fulfilling its international human rights obligations in close cooperation with all United Nations bodies and in accordance with United Nations and other international documents. It also referred to its efforts in enhancing dialogue and ensuring greater understanding between civilisations, cultures and religions. 102. With regard to the right to development, the delegation underlined its efforts in implementing the Millennium Development Goals by ensuring respect for all human rights.  103. Uzbekistan prepared comments to the compilation of OHCHR for the review of Uzbekistan and comments to the statements of 25 NGOs to the national report. It also noted the diffusion of its national action plan for the preparation of the universal periodic review, as well as its efforts in organising the sixtieth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. II. CONCLUSIONS AND/OR RECOMMENDATIONS 104. The recommendations formulated during the interactive dialogue have been examined by Uzbekistan and the recommendations listed below enjoy the support of Uzbekistan: 1. 	Develop its legislation in order to meet the basic development needs of the country in its transitional period (Palestine); 2. 	Strengthen inter-ministerial coordination in law enforcement activities of agencies and implementation of measures to protect human rights and fundamental freedoms (Philippines); 3. 	Continue efforts in promoting and nurturing a vibrant civil society (Malaysia); 4. 	Accelerate its poverty alleviation programmes (South Africa);  5. 	Take all appropriate ways and means to further develop and strengthen a culture of human rights, create more human rights capacity-building and promote human rights education and public awareness-raising with a view to better promoting and protecting of all human rights (Islamic Republic of Iran); 6. 	Continue the practice of adopting national plans of action on various fields with the purpose to improve the human rights situation in the country, as well as to implement some of the recommendations given by the United Nations treaty bodies (Azerbaijan); 7. 	Continue to pursue a policy ensuring that there is no distortion in the development of economic, social, cultural, civil and political rights (Belarus); 8. 	Strengthen and deepen interaction with relevant international human rights mechanisms (Malaysia) and continue to engage with them constructively (Bangladesh); 9. 	Pursue positive endeavours aimed at promoting and protecting the rights of women, including through the strengthening of the measures already taken to prevent and combat trafficking in women (Cuba); 10. 	Continue efforts to combat trafficking in women and children, by fully implementing the recently passed law of April 2008, on countering trafficking in persons (Malaysia); 11. 	Consider establishing a national independent mechanism to monitor all places of detention (France); 12. 	Improve the conditions of detention (Hungary, Poland); to establish independent mechanisms for complaints and for monitoring conditions in places of detention (United Kingdom); 13. 	Introduce awareness-raising programmes aimed at positive contributions of persons with disabilities together with further measures to enhance their participation in decision-making processes (Czech Republic); 14. 	Use appropriate international experience to ensure human rights in the ecological crisis zone (Ukraine); 15. 	Continue positive efforts to improve economic, social and cultural rights (Cuba); 16. 	Continue with positive work to ensure the progress of the rights of children and their full well-being (Cuba); 17. 	Promote legislation in conformity with UNICEF and ILO standards regarding the rights of the child (Saudi Arabia); 18. 	Continue to work closely with civil society to fight the propagation of HIV/AIDS, without which the 6th objective of the MDGs will be difficult to achieve (Morocco); 19. 	Continue its efforts, in particular in the area of the juvenile justice system and access to basic health services, especially in prisons, as well as eventual implementation of recommendations that may come out of the review Uzbekistan, with the assistance of the international community (Nigeria); 20. 	Continue to improve living standards, access for basic services such as health and education with the full support and cooperation of the international community (Bangladesh); 21. 	Continue to give priority to education programmes, therefore contributing to the strengthening of the democratization process (Nicaragua); 22. 	Continue to dedicate resources to promote the right to education and the rights of children (Philippines); 23. 	Step up existing efforts to implement human rights education and training across all levels of society (Malaysia); 24. 	Continue efforts in the areas of human rights education and dissemination (Viet Nam); 25. 	Combat organized crimes, terrorism, drug trafficking with the technical assistance of the international community (Algeria); 26. 	Effectively fight against the practice of forced child labour, including by considering taking specific administrative and penal actions towards those officials who, in their respective provinces, incentivize or facilitate the labour of children in cotton fields (Italy); 27.	 Continue with international support its efforts to complete its human rights architecture and to spread human rights culture in Uzbekistan, as well as providing the necessary training and capacity building to law enforcement and the members of the judiciary in the area of human rights (Egypt); 28. 	Disseminate the outcome of the review through the national mass media in order to inform the public at large of its presentation made today, the achievements made and recommendations which are going to be implemented in the next period (Egypt); 29. 	Adopt and strengthen existing measures to prevent and combat trafficking in women (Egypt).  30. 	Immediately cease all public support for the employment of children in cotton harvesting and that the Government publicly condemn and effectively combat all forms of child labour ( Germany); 31. 	Ensure regular inspection of harvesting practices to monitor and guarantee full compliance with international child labour standards (Netherlands).  105. Uzbekistan indicated that it would study the conformity of the following recommendations with the national legislation of Uzbekistan and will provide its answer in due time: 1. 	Consider ratifying OP-CAT (United Kingdom, Mexico, Poland, Brazil, Denmark, France) in the near future (Denmark), signing the Optional Protocol (Sweden) and take the necessary measures at the national level in order to do so (United Kingdom, and the Rome Statute establishing the International Criminal Court (Mexico, Slovakia, Brazil); 2. 	Accede to the OP-CAT and to establish its national preventive mechanism accordingly (Czech Republic); 3. 	Strengthen its collaboration with national and international civil society actors, notably by giving general accreditation to the major international human rights organizations (Switzerland); 4. 	Reach the human rights goals set out by the Council in its resolution 9/12 (Brazil); 5. 	Strengthen cooperation with the special procedures of the Council (Ukraine, Republic of Korea ); to consider extending an open standing invitation to special procedures mechanisms (Mexico, Latvia ,Switzerland),extend invitations to the thematic special procedures (Ukraine) particularly to those that have requested to visit the country (Mexico, Slovakia, Slovenia, Republic of Korea) as well as the Working Group on Arbitrary Detention (Mexico), and in particular the Special Rapporteur on the question of torture (Denmark, Japan, Spain, Switzerland), the Special Rapporteur on freedom of opinion and expression (Spain) the Special Rapporteur on human rights defenders (Ireland, Norway); and to respond questionnaires to the mandate holders in due time (Ukraine) and implement the recommendations made by the Committee Against Torture on human rights defenders (Ireland); 6. 	Consider the possibility of adopting legislation which will promote gender equality, and to consider the adoption of legislation to provide equality of rights and opportunities (Argentina); 7. 	Consider the possibility of reviewing these practices and also the idea of implementing labour inspections by qualified professionals and with appropriate funding (Argentina); 8. 	Modify its criminal code in order to establish a definition on torture and harshness of sentences according to the Convention on Tortures (Chile; Mexico), broaden the definition in a way to encompass all cases of torture by all persons acting in an official capacity (Germany);  9. 	Grant access to the announced visits of independent experts to places of detention (Hungary); 10. 	Ensure that its legislation and practice fully respect article 19 of the ICCPR (Canada); 11. 	Ensure that conscientious objection to military service is available to individuals irrespective of their religion or belief and that the process for consideration applications is under civilian control and to provide a non-punitive civilian alternative service (Slovenia); 12. 	Accede to the 1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees (Algeria). 106.  Uzbekistan indicated that the following recommendations are pertaining to measures already being implemented or which had already been implemented and will be further considered by the Government: 1. 	Follow the recommendations made by the Committee Against Torture with a view to adopting all necessary measures to combat impunity (Switzerland);  2. 	Establish a national human rights institution ( South Africa )in compliance with the Paris Principles (United Kingdom);  3. 	Ensure the full and equal enjoyment by women of all human rights without discrimination (Canada); to take effective measures to combat violence against women (Canada); to adopt a law on equal rights and equal opportunities to protect the endangered elements of society, namely children, women and people with disabilities (Hungary); 4. 	Take all necessary measures to prevent torture (Germany, United Kingdom, France, The Netherlands, Denmark, Canada) and other cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment or punishment (France, Canada), in particular in places of detention (France, Sweden), in line with international law obligation (Netherlands) and report about the results in the next UPR round (Netherlands) and ensure that the absolute prohibition of torture is observed, (United Kingdom, Denmark, Netherlands), as recommended (United Kingdom); to adopt a zero-tolerance approach to the continuing problem of torture, and to the practice of impunity, as recommended by the Committee Against Torture and the Special Rapporteur (Ireland), to initiate investigations into all allegations of torture or other forms of ill-treatment (Denmark, Austria, Canada), in a thorough, impartial and independent manner (Denmark, Austria), as required by international human rights law (Austria), bring to justice, prosecute and punish  all alleged perpetrators (Denmark, Canada), provide victims of torture with adequate reparation in accordance with international human rights obligations (Austria); 5. 	Keep all places of detention under systematic review (Canada); guarantee detainees their fundamental rights, especially the right of access to a lawyer (Hungary), ensure in practice better access of every detainee to lawyers, family members (Poland United Kingdom) medical treatment and other legal guarantees to ensure protection from torture (Poland), enable unfettered and continue access of ICRC to detention facilities (Canada), continue to allow unfettered regular access of the ICRC to detention and prison facilities (Czech Republic) to all detention facilities (Slovakia, Poland, Czech Republic, Hungary) in accordance with the ICRC standard working procedures also beyond the trial period (Slovakia) following the encouraging agreement reached in March 2008 (Canada); consider giving priority to the training of law enforcement officials regarding the treatment of detainees (Denmark)  6. 	Ensure that the judiciary has the necessary independence from the executive branch, limiting the attributions of the latter to the appointment of judges, in particular to the Supreme Court (Chile) 7. 	Introduce a simpler registration process for religious organizations than currently exists (United Kingdom); 8. 	Do its utmost to eliminate forced child labour and intensify its efforts to effectively implement the national legislation, in particular the labour code of 1996, and international conventions ratified by the Government on this subject (Switzerland); 9. 	Adopt a national legislation complying with international human rights standards, to ensure freedom of assembly as enshrined in the Constitution, in particular by guaranteeing human rights NGOs the right to freely carry out their activities (France) 10. 	Broaden the area of freedom of the media, in particular by eliminating restrictions on foreign and national media and adopting more flexible rules relating to the accreditation of foreign journalists (France) 11. 	Ensure the exercise of the freedom of expression, assembly, association, and the right to participate in public and political life (Chile);  12. 	Ensure that everyone including human rights defenders can peacefully exercise their right to freedom of expression in conformity with obligations under the ICCPR (Netherlands) 13. 	Investigate all reports of assaults on and harassment of human rights defenders and bring to justice those responsible (Netherlands) 14. 	Fully respect the freedom of religion or belief as also expressed in the recommendations of the Human Rights Committee (Netherlands) 15. 	Adopt adequate measures for the protection and promotion of religious freedom, in order to ensure an effective freedom of worship of all religious communities and comply with its international obligations in this field, and ensure the right to seek, receive and provide information and ideas, including by electronic means and from foreign sources (Italy); 16. 	Take further steps to enable civil society to thrive without interference and restrictions (Austria); 17. 	Liberalize the work of mass media, and draw a clear distinction between the legitimate fight against terrorism and strict respect for freedom of religion (Spain); 18. 	Lift all restrictions on the activities of civil society and complies with the request by the Human Rights Committee to bring its law, regulations and practice governing the registration of political parties into line with the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (Ireland); 19. 	Adopt effective measures to prevent any harassment or intimidation of all those exercising the right to freedom of opinion and expression, including journalists and human rights defenders (Canada); 20. 	Ensure compliance with international child labour standards, including ILO Convention 182 on the Elimination of the Worst Forms of Child Labour and collaborate with ILO to that effect and implement the relevant recommendations of the Committee on the Rights of the Child and the Human Rights Committee (Canada); 21. 	Apply fairly and without discrimination all registration procedures and in conformity with international standards (Norway); 22. 	Promote and protect human rights and fundamental freedoms by applying the measures stipulated in the law to combat terrorism, drug trafficking and other threats against the national security (Mexico); 23. 	Take appropriate legislative and policy measures in order to guarantee full respect of human rights, including in the fight against terrorism (Sweden); 24. 	Implement the ILO Convention concerning the Minimum Age for Admission to Employment and the prohibition and Immediate Action for the Elimination of the Worst Forms of Child Labour (Finland); 25. 	Fully implement the national strategy to fight against child labour and to promote descent work (Brazil); 26. 	Implement effectively its commitments relating to freedom of religion as contained in the ICCPR, to which Uzbekistan is a party (France); 27. 	Ensure the full implementation of ILO Conventions 182 and 138, and that it stop the practice of sending school-age children to participate in the harvesting of cotton (Poland). 107. The following recommendations did not enjoy the support of Uzbekistan: Uzbekistan considers that the recommendations contained in paragraphs 33 (a, b), 39 (a), 48 (c), 65(a), and 79 (d, f, g, h) are not part of Uzbekistan’s obligations under internationally agreed human rights standards. Uzbekistan considers the recommendations contained in paragraphs 43(a), 44, 50 (a, b), 65(d), 67 (a) and 87(a) as unacceptable because factually wrong.  108. All conclusions and/or recommendations contained in the present report reflect the position of the submitting State(s) and /or the State under review thereon. They should not be construed as endorsed by the Working Group as a whole. Annex 
COMPOSITION OF THE DELEGATION 
H.E. Dr. Akmal SAIDOV, Chairman of the National Centre for Human Rights (level of Minister), Head of Delegation; 
Mrs. Sayera RASHIDOVA, Authorized Person of Oliy Majlis (Parliament) on Human 
Rights; 
Mr. Esemurat KANYAZOV, Deputy Minister of Justice;  
Mr. Alisher SHARAFUTDINOV, Deputy Prosecutor-General;  
Mr. Abdukarim SHODIYEV, Deputy Minister of Internal Affairs;   
Mr. Durbek AMANOV, Head of the United Nations and International Organizations 
Department, Ministry of Foreign Affairs;  
Mr. Oybek SHAKHAVDINOV, Second Secretary, Ministry of Foreign Affairs. 
