Distr.: General 11 July 2011 Original: English General Assembly Human Rights Council Eighteenth session Agenda item 6 Universal Periodic Review Report of the Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review* Somalia * The annex to the present report is circulated as received. Contents Paragraphs Page Introduction ............................................................................................................... 1-4 3 
I Summary of the proceedings of the review process................................................. 5-97 3 
A. Presentation by the State under review ............................................................ 5-34 3 
B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review ........................ 35-97 6 
II. Conclusions and/or recommendations...................................................................... 98-99 13  Annex Composition of the delegation ............................................................................................................ 23 Introduction 1. The Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review (UPR), established in accordance with Human Rights Council resolution 5/1 of 18 June 2007, held its eleventh session from 2 to 13 May 2011.  The review of Somalia was held at the 4th, meeting on 3 May 2011. The delegation of Somalia was headed by Zahra Mohamed Ali Samantar, State Minister at the Office of the Prime Minister of the Transitional Federal Government of the Republic of Somalia and national focal point of child protection and human rights. At its 8th meeting, held on 5 May 2011, the Working Group adopted the report on Somalia 2. On 21 June 2010, the Human Rights Council selected the following group of rapporteurs (troika) to facilitate the review of Somalia: Angola, Mexico, Thailand. 3. In accordance with paragraph 15 of the annex to resolution 5/1, the following documents were issued for the review of  Somalia: (a) A national report submitted/written presentation made in accordance with paragraph 15 (a) (A/HRC/WG.6/11/SOM/1);  (b) A compilation prepared by OHCHR in accordance with paragraph 15 (b) (A/HRC/WG.6/11/SOM/2); (c) A summary prepared by OHCHR in accordance with paragraph 15 (c) (A/HRC/WG.6/11/SOM/3). 4. A list of questions prepared in advance by Belgium, Canada, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Ireland, Latvia, Netherlands, Norway, Slovenia, Sweden, Switzerland and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland was transmitted to Somalia through the troika. These questions are available on the extranet of the UPR. I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process A. Presentation by the State under review 5. The head of the delegation stated that an understanding of the Somali situation and the political impasse in which Somalia has been trapped for more than two decades is a pre.requisite to any meaningful discussion on the human rights situation in Somalia and the challenges that it faces.  For the past two decades, Somalia has been characterized by the total breakdown of all basic service delivery and systems of governance, including rule-of.law institutions. 6. A degree of stability continues in Somaliland as well as in Puntland, which has permitted certain progress in human rights enjoyment. This was mainly due to locally dominant clans using the influence of respected traditional leaders as facilitators of reconciliation while in the south and central regions warlords have used clan elders as a means to stay in power.  7. The continuing armed conflict has resulted in the total destruction of assets and infrastructure in south and central Somalia. Any progress made since independence in forming  a unified national entity has been lost, the rule of law collapsed and people have had to go back to the traditional system and seek protection from their clans. 8. At the same time, however, the traditional structures and institutions that for many generations functioned through kinship, marriage, and the social codes of conduct, “Xeer”, (Somali customary law) to maintain social cohesion have been weakened by the introduction of a centralized modern system of governance. Hence, when the modern state institutions fell apart, the traditional institutions were no longer able to resume their earlier role. 9. The entire State system has to be rebuilt. The main challenge ahead of the Somali Government is the harmonization between the traditional setting and the modern statehood in which the harmonization between the genuine Islamic sharia law, the Somali customary law and the modern law is one of the main pillars. 10. In 2004, Somalis agreed on the Transitional Federal Charter (TFC) which resulted from the 2002–2004 Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD) sponsored peace talks in Kenya. Since its relocation to Somalia in 2005, the Transitional Federal Government (TFG) has faced opposition from armed groups. 11. The delegation stated that the situation in Somalia does not fit the general approach of the universal periodic review (UPR) because the UPR process generally involves a review of the human rights record of a Government in a normal situation. This is not the case in Somalia. The TFG has to deal with human rights violations which are not of its own making on a daily basis. The capacity of the TFG to protect its citizens, particularly in areas outside its direct authority is very limited. For example, people in Al Shabaab.controlled territories face gross human rights violations such as summary and extrajudicial executions, torture and other inhuman and degrading punishment such as amputations and floggings. 12. Chapter 5 of the TFC provides for the protection of the fundamental rights and freedoms of the people of Somalia. Article 14 states the Somali Republic shall recognize and enforce all international human rights conventions and treaties to which the Republic is a party. 13. The TFC guarantees the rights to reside, work and travel freely in any part of the country; to organize, form or take part in political, labour, professional or social entities according to law; to vote upon attainment of 18 years of age; and to contest any vacant seat. It also prohibits interference with personal communication, and guarantees inter alia, equality before the law, the right to life, personal liberty and security, rights relating to legal proceedings, labour, the right to assemble and freedom to strike, freedom of information and media, the right to establish political parties, and the right to establish social organizations, political asylum, education, protection of family, and social welfare. 14. Chapter 9 of the TFC defines the scope and powers of the federal judiciary. The TFC recognises the independence of the judiciary in the exercise of its functions and the separation of powers between it, the legislature and the executive branch of Government. 15. The Transitional Federal Parliament (TFP) has established inter alia, the following commissions: federal constitutional commission; national commission for reconciliation; national commission for the recovery and registration of public and private property; disarmament and demobilization commission; economic recovery commission; land and property disputes commission; national resettlement commission; and the Somalia Olympic commission. 16. Article 71 of the TFC states that the Charter shall have legal effect pending the eventual enforcement of the National Federal Constitution and that the 1960 Somalia Constitution and other national laws shall apply in respect of all matters not covered and not inconsistent with this Charter. 17. Somalia is a signatory to a number of international human rights instruments.  It signed the Convention of the Rights of the Child in May 2002 and its Optional Protocol on the involvement of children in armed conflict in September 2005. 18. Article 16 of the TFC recognizes the right to life and provides that no person shall be deprived of his/her life. However, the right to life is often violated through deliberate and indiscriminate attacks causing civilian casualties, suicide bombings and attacks by Al-Shabaab. 19. The Somali Penal Code covers “hurt”, “grievous hurt” and “very grievous hurt” and Islam also prohibits female genital mutilation (FGM).  However, FGM is very widespread in Somalia and almost all Somali women and girls are subjected to this damaging practice. 20. Article 20 of the TFC guarantees the freedom of press and independent media and the right of every person to freely express his/her own opinion in any manner subject to limitations prescribed by law for the purpose of safeguarding morals and public security. 21. While food has always been scarce in Somalia, the current droughts have aggravated the situation. Lack of water in most parts of Somalia is threatening the lives of millions of people. The need for food is driving people to seek livelihood in overcrowded IDP camps. The situation is much worse in Al-Shabaab held areas. 22. According to the TFC, education shall be recognized as a basic right for all Somali citizens, and all citizens shall have a right to free primary and secondary education. 23. As a state party to the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949, Somalia is bound by the rules of international humanitarian law applicable to non-international armed conflicts. 24. The fighting in Somalia has been marked by widespread and systematic use of children as soldiers. The Government does not, as a policy, recruit children or allow the recruitment of children into its security forces and is committed to eradicating the practice of child soldering in Somalia. 25. The civil war in Somalia has been devastating in both human and material terms. It is not only a political imperative but also a social necessity to deal with the legacies of past atrocities, justice and reconciliation.  26. Somalia is currently facing tough and complex challenges inter alia, poverty and droughts, insecurity aggravated by the lack of fully functional institutions including the institutions of rule of law.  In order to address these challenges and constraints, the Government has initiated appropriate action, inter alia, in the following areas: health; education; water; institutions of rule of law; police; judiciary; custodial services; making human rights the foundation of the transition for a new Somalia; and an action plan for human rights. 27. The Government is fully aware of all recommendation made by the independent expert on the situation of human rights in Somalia. A joint international assessment mission including the Government of Somalia at national and sub-national level is required to evaluate Somalia’s technical assistance and capacity building needs. 28. The slowness of the decision-making process of the United Nations has meant that progress is yet to be made, despite four important Human Rights Council resolutions and the outcome of the stand-alone interactive dialogue for Somalia held in Geneva on 29 September 2010. OHCHR should make sure that all obstacles are removed for the implementation of the various proposals it has made in the past regarding assistance to Somalia in the field of human rights. The TFG calls upon the brotherly, friendly and any willing country to implement timely and tangible bilateral cooperation within the legal framework of the resolutions adopted by an unprecedented level of consensus by the Human Rights Council. 29. The head of the delegation stated that she was particularly pleased that a distinguished representative of Puntland was part of the delegation of Somalia and she gave her the floor. 30. The delegate reiterated Puntland’s strong commitment to work closely on the implementation of the recommendations of the Working Group.  For over 12 years, Puntland was at the forefront of guarding the unity, territorial integrity and sovereignty of Somalia while on the same time establishing peace and stability in Puntland itself.  In that period, Puntland was able to establish political structures that managed three peaceful power transitions, delivery of essential services and acting as a haven for hundreds of thousands of internally displaced people (IDPs) from the rest of Somalia as well as migrant workers from neighbouring countries. 31. Piracy in Somalia has been a threat to international shipping since the second phase of the Somali civil war.  Poverty and unemployment are rife in Somalia. The World Bank estimates that over 40 per cent of Somalis live in extreme poverty (less than a dollar a day) and almost 75 per cent of the households subsist on less than US$ 2 a day.  Approximately two thirds of Somali youth are without jobs.  32. After the 1991 collapse of the Siyad Barre regime, illegal, unreported and unregulated foreign fishing trawlers started to trespass and fish in Somali waters, even within the 12-nautical-mile territorial waters. These foreign pirate trawlers encroached on the artisanal fishing grounds off the north-eastern coast of Somalia.  The illegal unreported and unregulated foreign fishing piracy in the Somali seas is ignored, underlining the international community's misunderstanding, partiality, and the impracticality of the proposed actions to find ways to effectively resolve the piracy threat. 33. Puntland is at the forefront of the war against piracy. Over 280 pirates are currently jailed in Puntland. The administration has established a special law of severe punishment for captured pirates.  Simple and less costly solutions are available to deal with the piracy problem: funding and supporting governance efforts in Puntland and the socio-economic rehabilitation and reintegration of the youth; outlawing commercial payment of ransoms; joint rescue hostages and seizing ships currently held by pirates;  maintaining roust regional coast guard to patrol Somali’s Exclusive Economic Zone;  linking naval forces and Somalia commercial interests to patrol and rebuild the fishing and cargo industry that once supported these areas. 34. In times of war, women suffer all manner of abuses and harassment besides being required to perform their social obligations. Being the principal victims of war, the role women could also play in peacebuilding is extremely crucial. The Ministry of Women’s Development and Family Affairs has managed to organize a successful peace dialogue among all Somali women including in Somaliland, the Diaspora and other Somali-speaking countries. The creation of “Somali Women without Borders” for the enhancement of peace and promotion and protection of human rights are among the deliberation of this important gathering.  Somali women were present throughout the peace processes, even though their participation was not acknowledged or rewarded in some instances. Their efforts ought to be acknowledged and honored. B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review 35. During the interactive dialogue, 55 delegations made statements. Additional statements which could not be delivered during the interactive dialogue owing to time constraints are posted on the extranet of the universal periodic review when available.1 1 	Ecuador, Ethiopia, Iraq, Kyrgyzstan, Poland, Qatar, Senegal, Uganda, United Republic of Tanzania, Zimbabwe, and the Holy See. . Recommendations made during the dialogue are to be found in section II of the present report. 36. Saudi Arabia noted that despite a commitment to human rights in the Transnational Federal Charter the security situation and State institutions still needed to be strengthened so as to promote of human rights. Saudi Arabia highlighted the complexity of challenges with which Somalia was faced, including the security situation, poverty, unemployment and lack of education as well as weak State institutions, and made recommendations. 37. India acknowledged the constraints faced by the Government in fully securing the human rights of its population and recognized its efforts to expand the public service delivery system. It noted the Government’s commitment to the elimination of FGM and to amend the penal code to prohibit this practice.  It recalled the responsibility of the international community to come to Somalia’s aid. 38. Algeria recalled the problems brought by the conflict in Somalia, including piracy, illegal fishing, dumping of toxic waste in territorial waters and drought. It hoped that the Government could achieve national reconciliation and added that efforts to improve the human rights situation should not be seen independently of a comprehensive solution to the crisis. It reiterated its call for the transfer of United Nations agency activities to safe places in Somalia. Algeria made recommendations. 39. Oman noted the impact of the conflict on the internal situation in Somalia, and especially on its economic and social situation.  Therefore, the review of Somalia was not held in regular circumstances.  Oman stated that, in spite of the challenges it faced, the Government of Somalia was making efforts to rebuild institutions. Oman made recommendations.  40. Hungary commended the Government’s intent to improve the protection of children’s rights, particularly child soldiers. It was concerned by reports that children have served in the Government’s armed forces and by reports that IDPs often do not even have support for their most basic needs.  It was disappointed by the fact that the national report did not address the dire position of women. Hungary made recommendations. 41. Canada recognized the complexities of the human rights situation in Somalia and took note of the Government’s pledge to rebuild the State on the foundation of human rights and international humanitarian law. It stated that in finalizing the Federal Constitution, Somalia would demonstrate its commitment to ensuring that human rights were fully enshrined therein. Canada made recommendations.  42. Bahrain welcomed efforts taken in the areas of health, education and the rule of law and awareness-raising on human rights. Bahrain noted obstacles which could only be overcome if all parties worked together and engaged in constructive dialogue. Bahrain invited all parties to work towards peace and respect for their obligations under international human rights law. It inquired about measures to raise awareness of human rights in Somalia. 43. Austria called upon the Government to comply with its human rights obligations in the territory it controlled.  It was concerned by the prevailing culture of impunity and the crackdown on the independent press.  It called on all parties to stop indiscriminate shelling in densely populated areas.  It noted the Government’s appointment of a focal point with the United Nations to address the issue of recruitment of children into armed forces. Austria made recommendations.  44. France noted that the Government was considering a moratorium on the death penalty and requested further clarification. It asked about measures to strengthen the independence and improve access to justice as well as ensure detention conditions according to international standards, particularly for women and children. It welcomed the Government’s intention to sign the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW) and amend the penal code to ban FGM. France made recommendations.  45. United Arab Emirates noted Government efforts to protect human rights despite difficult circumstances and observed that the institutional framework was in need of further strengthening. UAE expressed appreciation for the will of the Government to promote the rule of law and for its efforts to establish peace. It emphasized the need to focus efforts on institution-building, supported by technical assistance, as envisaged in relevant Human Rights Council resolutions. 46. Thailand noted with appreciation the TFG’s efforts in the protection of human rights despite challenges faced during its State-building. It inquired about the state of the implementation of the Human Rights Council resolution 15/28 on assistance to Somalia in the field of human rights. Thailand expressed its concern regarding the weak justice system and the piracy attacks off the coast of Somalia. It made recommendations. 47. Djibouti noted the challenges in re-establishing the rule of law after two decades of conflict.  It expressed dismay about the forcible recruitment of children in areas controlled by Al-Shabaab, and congratulated the Government on its actions to address this matter. Djibouti emphasized that Somalia needed an integrated approach as well as the financial, technical and political support of the international community in order to achieve peace and security. 48. Kuwait noted Government efforts to rebuild institutions and deliver basic services such as access to health and education to the population.  However, internationally recognized human rights could not be ensured as long as the Somali population could not be guaranteed even the right of life, which the Government aimed to protect. The right to life was endangered by violent attacks of armed groups whose victims were often civilians. Kuwait made recommendations. 49. Switzerland expressed concern at the grave violations of international law reported daily in Somalia, including summary and extrajudicial executions; cruel and inhuman treatment such as flogging and amputations; forced marriage; use of civilians as human shields and threats to journalists and human rights defenders. It made recommendations. 50. Japan welcomed the improvement in the public security situation in the urban areas of Mogadishu and the drafting of the Constitution. It stated that TFG needed to establish the rule of law in cooperation with international community and work on reforming its domestic legislation. Japan expressed concern at the human rights violations committed against women and children. It made recommendations. 51. Israel expressed concern over reports of lack of clean water, basic health services, independent judicial mechanisms, accessible remedies and accountability for perpetrators of sexual violence in Somalia. It expressed concern over areas controlled by insurgent groups. It urged the international community to provide assistance to the TFG and made recommendations. 52. Ireland urged Somalia to pay a special attention to establishing a functioning justice system. It noted Somalia’s commitment to enshrine human rights principles in the Constitution. It expressed concern at numerous reports of children being recruited as soldiers, on all sides. Ireland asked about steps taken to improve access for humanitarian actors and aid agencies within Somalia and to ensure that no children under the age of 18 are recruited into the armed forces or police. It made recommendations. 53. Slovenia expressed concern about the reports of child labour with cases of child soldiers and street begging. It commended Somalia for ensuring access to free education in Mogadishu for the first time since 1991 but it remained concerned about the low level of children’s participation in the education system. Slovenia expressed concern about discrimination and violence against women, including FGM. It made recommendations. 54. Egypt noted the prolonged conflict’s impact on Somalia and expressed hope that all parties would work together to re-establish stability, as envisaged in the agreement reached at the Istanbul Conference in May 2010, and the Djibouti Peace Agreement.  Egypt expressed appreciation for the Government’s announcement that it would consider acceding to international human rights agreements. It emphasized the importance of international assistance and made recommendations. 55. Azerbaijan noted Somalia’s efforts to build its capacity and ensure basic services. It took note of Somalia’s intention to ratify a number of international instruments, including the CRC. Azerbaijan stated that the international community’s assistance was important to overcome Somalia’s institutional and operational challenges. It welcomed Somalia’s commitment to eradicate the recruitment of child soldiers. It made recommendations. 56. Indonesia commended Somalia’s continued cooperation with United Nations human rights mechanisms, including the visits of the independent expert on the situation of human rights in Somalia. It noted the challenges facing Somalia after a protracted civil war and made recommendations. 57. Germany commended Somalia’s achievements in human rights, including the drafting of the Constitution in 2010. Germany asked for information about the position of the TFG on female genital mutilation. It noted that gender-based violence remained an issue of concern and that rule of law remained fragile. Germany made recommendations. 58. Yemen noted that women’s position in Somalia was reflected in the fact that the delegation was headed by a woman. It emphasized the importance of implementing the resolutions adopted by the Human Rights Council on Somalia. Yemen inquired about Government efforts, in cooperation with the international community, to reduce the number of refugees fleeing to neighbouring countries, such as Yemen. It made recommendations. 59. Palestine noted Government efforts to protect human rights and make them the cornerstone of Somalia’s transition, including through training and awareness-raising. In this regard, Palestine asked OHCHR about the reasons for the non-implementation of the four resolutions adopted by the Human Rights Council on Somalia, and encouraged further efforts. It urged the international community to provide financial assistance for envisaged activities to improve the situation in Somalia. 60. Portugal welcomed TFG efforts in implementing a State-building process but expressed deep concern over gross human rights violations in Somalia, including violation of the right to life in Al-Shabaab controlled territories. It asked about TFG plans in this regard. It made recommendations. 61. Uruguay noted the complexity of Somalia’s situation and reiterated the importance of international cooperation in support of national efforts to advance the peace process, political transition and national reconciliation as a basis for socio-economic development. It expressed concern over the situation of children and women and made recommendations. 62. Denmark expressed concern about violations of international humanitarian and human rights law in southern and central Somalia, while acknowledging the difficulties faced by Somalia in addressing this problem. It was also concerned that the parties to the conflict had systematically prevented journalists from carrying out their work and that many journalists had been forced into exile due to the threat of human rights abuses. Denmark made recommendations. 63. Mexico recognized Somalia’s challenges and welcomed its efforts in this regard including the will to consolidate State institutions and to finalize consultations to adopt a Constitution. It made recommendations and called on the international community of donors to aim for action on the ground, especially on the issue of security. 64. Pakistan stated that it was imperative for international community to support the efforts of TFG to end conflict. It noted with appreciation the TFG commitment to improve the living standards of its people by providing education and health services. Pakistan expressed its hope that constitutional-making process, which was started in difficult circumstances, would be concluded soon. It made recommendations. 65. The United States of America expressed concerns about civilian casualities and use of children in armed conflict by all parties; reports of summary executions; forced marriages of young children; discrimination based on religious beliefs and practice and the prevalence of child labour. It commended the TFG for its efforts to establish a commission focused on ending child soldier recruitment and requested an update on these efforts. It made recommendations. 66. Islamic Republic of Iran noted that Somalia’s situation does not fit the general approach of the UPR since the process generally involves the review of human rights record of a Government in a normal situation and the TFG must deal with human rights violations that are not of its making. It noted that at this crucial juncture, the international community must continue funding all relevant United Nations activities. It made recommendations. 67. The delegation of Somalia replied to a number of questions. Somalia stated that it was not considering the ratification of the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court, while it was considering the ratification of the Convention on the Rights of the Child, the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, the Convention on Disabilities and its Optional Protocol. The individual complaint procedure of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights will need further study. Somalia will not extend a standing invitation to special procedures but it will consider agreeing on the invitation for the Special Rapporteur on violence against women. As a signatory to the 1949 Geneva Conventions, Somalia had an obligation to respect international humanitarian law. 68. Somalia needed international assistance by international legal experts to train security force on the respect of human rights and to reform its penal code. The principles of proportionality, distinction and precaution must be respected in the conduct of military operations.  69. Somalia stated that it was considering the inclusion of a specific crime in the Penal Code regarding female genital mutilation. More in general, the Government was committed to addressing the problem of violence against women. 70. Regarding child soldiers, the High Level Committee issued very strict guidelines against this phenomenon.  While the Committee did not find evidence of the presence of child soldiers in the army, it decided that any child found in the security forces should be released immediately. 71. The Government gave instructions to security forces to ensure that journalists are protected and it was willing to revise its media laws to bring them in line with international obligations. 72. Islam shall be the religion of the State and the sharia law the base of its legal system. 73. The Government was also considering declaring a moratorium on the death penalty, establishing an independent human rights commission and granting a broad amnesty to foster reconciliation. However, war crimes and crimes against humanity will not be the object of any amnesty. The only way to end the culture of impunity is to ensure accountability. The Government was seeking the assistance of OHCHR and of any willing country. 74. Belgium expressed concern about the application of the death penalty and discrimination against women. It asked TFG to describe actions taken to increase the number of women in Parliament and their participation in peace negotiations. Belgium also expressed concern at the practice of FGM. Belgium asked how the TFG could ensure journalists’ protection, and whether the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) could provide support in such efforts. Belgium made recommendations. 75. Australia condemned indiscriminate attacks on civilians, particularly actions of insurgent groups, notably Al Shabaab, that are responsible for human rights violations, including the recruitment of child soldiers, torture, and violations of press freedom. While recognizing constraints, Australia urged the Transitional Federal Government Government to ensure that its forces are mindful of international human rights and humanitarian law obligations. Australia made recommendations. 76. Argentina took note of Somalia’s challenges and made recommendations. 77. The Netherlands noted Somalia’s difficult historical background and commended the TFG for engaging with the UPR. It expressed concern over domestic violence and noted the TFG’s willingness to amend its Penal Code to prohibit FGM. It was concerned over freedom of the press and expression. It made recommendations. 78. Italy expressed concern over violence against civilians. It noted with appreciation the TFG commitment to respect human rights. Italy stated that TFG should intensify its efforts in cooperation with regional authorities and enforce rule of law, fight corruption and impunity, and pursue national reconciliation. It also called on the donor community and the United Nations to provide assistance to Somalia. Italy made recommendations. 79. The Philippines noted the Transitional Federal Government’s challenges and emphasized the need for the international community increased support. It appreciated the Government’s intention to ratify core human rights instruments, such as CEDAW and the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD), and to consider establishing a moratorium on the death penalty. The Philippines expressed concern over recurring incidents of piracy off the coast of Somalia and made recommendations.  80. Norway condemned any forced recruitment of schoolchildren. It noted with appreciation that the TFG had signed the Convention of the Rights of the Child. Norway called for an increased international presence in Somalia in 2011. It made recommendations. 81. Spain expressed deep concern that Somalia has been in civil war since 1991. It noted that only through a peace process, political transition and a search for harmony between parties that allows for socio-economic development, this dramatic situation will end. It made recommendations. 82. The United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland expressed concern about the impact of continued fighting on civilians and urged the TGF to explore ways to minimize indiscriminate fire.  It further urged all parties to protect the rights of IDPs. It welcomed TGF’s intention to ratify CEDAW and the Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC) and expressed the hope that Somalia would honour its commitment to end any association with child soldiers, and that it would give women greater access to justice. It made recommendations.  83. Brazil noted that a lasting solution to Somalia’s protracted crisis should combine security and stability with reconciliation, reconstruction, economic revitalization and capacity-building. It noted that the Transitional Federal Parliament’s decision to unilaterally extend its mandate raised strong reactions. It welcomed the opening of schools and expressed concern over FGM. It made recommendations. 84. Sweden noted the reported difficulties for aid agencies to reach those in need due to the dangerous environment and stressed the need to take further action to ensure free humanitarian access. Sweden asked if Somalia had taken steps to establish an independent Human Rights Commission and what was the current status of the process. Sweden made recommendations.  85. Morocco noted that the prolonged instability in Somalia had prevented the full protection of human rights.  It emphasized the international community’s responsibility to provide assistance. The UPR was an opportunity for the Council to contribute to these efforts. Morocco highlighted challenges with regard to security, IDPs and child soldiers as well as access to health, education and drinking water. Morocco made a recommendation. 86. Chile welcomed Somalia’s efforts to deal with piracy and its initiatives to strengthen rule of law. It expressed concern about the humanitarian crisis and insecurity faced by Somalis. It highlighted that the international community should respond to Somalia’s requests for support. It made recommendations. 87. Sudan noted the recommendations made by the independent expert on the situation of human rights in Somalia and stated that a joint international evaluation mission was required to assess technical assistance needs. Sudan called on the Council to accelerate the decision-making process to implement its four resolutions on Somalia, and on all Member States to support Somalia’s efforts towards reconciliation, peace, stability and development. 88. Nigeria noted the ongoing efforts by the TFG to draft a new Constitution. While recognizing the need for vigorous pursuance of a national reconciliation, it welcomed the Government’s initiative to establish a National Commission for Reconciliation. It made a recommendation. 89. Nicaragua welcomed Somalia’s national report focusing on its transitional framework. It recalled that Somalia’s internal armed conflict had impeded its development and its challenges should be understood. Nicaragua encouraged Somalia to benefit from the cooperation that could come from the Council so it may consolidate and stabilize its judicial and institutional framework and respond adequately to vulnerable situations. 90. Slovakia acknowledged the serious difficulties Somalia experienced over the last 20 years of conflict. It expressed concern at the recruitment and use of children in the conflict and at the plight of IDPs and refugees and at the vast scale of displacement as a direct consequence of the conflict. Slovakia made recommendations.  91. Turkey noted the legal framework for human rights protection in the Transitional Federal Charter and the relevant commitments in the finalization of the new Federal Constitution. Turkey appreciated the establishment of the Commission for Reconciliation. It encouraged the TFG to focus on the reopening schools and strengthening medical services, action with regard to death penalty, FGM and child soldiers. Turkey made recommendations.  92. South Africa recognized that Somalia’s report was prepared under difficult circumstances and appreciated that it set out its challenges. It encouraged the international community to provide Somalia with technical assistance to overcome these. It expressed concern over the impact of Somalia’s situation in the East Africa region and noted that the resolution of the conflict should remain the TFG priority. It made a recommendation. 93. Malaysia noted that Somalia’s path to democracy had met tough challenges such as an uncertain security situation, weakness of the rule of law, poverty and humanitarian concerns. It noted it was imperative for the Government to resolve internal disputes and pay greater attention to the principles of international human rights. It made recommendations. 94. Bangladesh highlighted that capacity-building and availability of assistance should be key issues in the UPR of Somalia. It noted that there was scope for further strengthening of efforts in addressing violence against women and children, including FGM. It stated that United Nations agencies and stakeholders needed to provide technical assistance and training to Somalia. Bangladesh made recommendations. 95. Cuba noted it was difficult to apply the UPR’s general focus to Somalia. It noted the TFG only controlled part of the country and cannot act in Somaliland and Puntland. It noted that the armed conflict also impacted the territory under the TFG, highlighting that the conflict had roots in Somalia’s colonial past. It expressed concern over hunger, food shortages and drought as well as over the situation of health and education. It made a recommendation. 96. China appreciated that the TFG attaches importance to human rights protection, as demonstrated by its efforts to create a positive atmosphere for human rights, a willingness to take concrete measures to protect the children’s rights, minority groups and persons with disabilities.  China expressed understanding of the challenges faced by the TFG and hoped that the international community would provide it with appropriate assistance in the human rights field. 97. Costa Rica expressed concern for the human rights situation in Somalia, particularly for women and girls; and for all those abuses that occur with lack of institutions, lack of rule of law and impunity. The international community should redouble efforts to aim for institutional capacity that covers all territory and called upon donors to support these efforts. It made recommendations. II. Conclusions and/or recommendations 98. The response of Somalia to the recommendations made during the interactive dialogue will be included in the outcome report adopted by the Human Rights Council at its eighteenth session in September 2011. The participants to the interactive dialogue recommended that Somalia: 98.1. Sign and ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture (OP-CAT), accede to the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance (CED) and ratify the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court (France); 98.2. Sign and ratify the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW), adopt national plans to combat violence against women, particularly female genital mutilation, and promote equal opportunities for men and women (France); 98.3. Ratify the Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC) and its Optional Protocol on the involvement of children in armed conflict and endorse the Paris Commitments to protect children from unlawful recruitment or use by armed forces or armed groups (France); 98.4. Sign and ratify CEDAW and its Optional Protocol, CED, the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD) and its Optional Protocol, OP-CAT, the Optional Protocol to the CRC on the sale of children, and ratify CRC and its Optional Protocol on the involvement of children in armed conflict and OP-ICESCR (Spain); 98.5. Take concrete steps including becoming a party to and implementing CRC and CEDAW (Japan); 98.6. Consider signing and ratifying CEDAW, CRC and the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Their Families (Indonesia); 98.7. Ratify CEDAW and CRC as soon as possible (Germany); 98.8. Accede to the core human rights instruments to which it is not yet a party, particularly CRC and CEDAW (Australia); 98.9. Ratify CRC and CEDAW (Costa Rica); 98.10. Take steps to accede to CRC, and ratify the United Nations Convention on Transnational Organized Crime and its Protocols (Philippines); 98.11.  Ratify CRC and its Optional Protocols (Portugal);  98.12.  Ratify CRC, including its two Optional Protocols (Norway);  98.13.  Consider the ratification of CRC and its Optional Protocols (Chile);  98.14.  Ratify CRC and ensure from the beginning that all measures to be  adopted for children incorporate its provisions (Uruguay); 98.15. Ratify CEDAW and its Optional Protocol (Netherlands); 98.16. Sign, ratify and implement those core international human rights instruments to which it is not yet party and abolish the death penalty (Slovenia); 98.17. Consider acceding to the international human rights treaties to which it is not yet a party and strengthen efforts to obtain technical assistance from OHCHR and international donors (Egypt); 98.18. Ensure that the fundamental principles of human rights are fully enshrined in the Constitution (Islamic Republic of Iran); 98.19. Finalize the Federal Constitution by the end of 2011 (Canada); 98.20. Proactively sustain the constitutional federal process in order to reinforce the long-term protection and respect for human rights and to establish the basis for future democratic elections (Switzerland); 98.21. Ban FGM by amending the penal code and implement a total elimination of such practice (Italy); 98.22. Follow through on its stated intent to amend its penal code with provisions to prohibit the harmful practice of female genital mutilation (Norway); 98.23. Amend the Penal Code to prohibit the practice of female genital mutilation (Canada); 98.24. Amend the Penal Code with provisions to prohibit FGM as soon as possible (Netherlands); 98.25. Introduce amendments in Somalia’s Penal Code on widespread practice of FGM (Portugal); 98.26. Criminalize the practice of female genital mutilation (Australia); 98.27. Take all necessary legal and practical measures to eliminate FGM, including considering amendments to the penal code with provisions to specifically prohibit this practice (Islamic Republic of Iran); 98.28. Take all legal measures available to prohibit FGM and ensure effective implementation, particularly in terms of prevention, awareness-raising, monitoring and sanctions (Belgium); 98.29. Reform its Penal Code to criminalize FGM and approach all this process in an integral manner (Costa Rica); 98.30. Ensure that human rights are built into Somalia’s legal framework and as a start ensure that members of the judiciary receive human rights training (United Kingdom); 98.31. Enact legislation designed to provide full legal protection for women against discrimination and to ensure equal opportunity for women to participate in public affairs (Indonesia); 98.32. Codify and harmonize national legislation, including customary law, in conformity with Somalia’s international obligations and the existing international standards in the field of human rights (Mexico); 98.33. Fulfil the promise of shortly setting up an independent national human rights commission (Hungary); 98.34. Establish an independent Human Rights Commission to identify and denounce human rights violations (Sweden); 98.35. Establish a national human rights institution that is compliant with the Paris Principles (Australia); 98.36. Speed up the process to establish an independent and credible national human rights institution in accordance with the Paris Principles (Indonesia); 98.37. Request advice and input from the OHCHR on creating an independent commission to investigate human rights violations that ensures perpetrators are held to account for their actions (United Kingdom); 98.38. Immediately set up civilian structures in those areas that come under Transitional Federal Government’s control to ensure the protection of human Rights (Austria); 98.39. Reverse its position favouring a three-year extension for the Transitional Federal Parliament and instead adopt a one-year extension coupled with governmental reforms and benchmarks, including the completion of a national Constitution within one year, and elections for the President and Speaker of Parliament in summer 2011 (United States of America); 98.40. Adopt, as soon as possible, the road map that guides political alternation at the end of the mandate of the Transitional Federal Institutions and consider that it should include principles of good governance, creation of institutional capacity and provision of basic social services (Mexico); 98.41. Strengthen the institutional framework for human rights (Oman); 98.42. Further enhance provisions of human rights education and training to its citizens (Philippines); 98.43. Redouble efforts to reinforce national institutions and create a proper framework for the full exercise of human rights and international humanitarian law (Argentina); 98.44. Create, in close cooperation with “Puntland” and “Somaliland”, institutions and mechanisms charged with promoting respect for human rights, recognizing the challenges this imposes (Switzerland); 98.45. Involve itself in a dialogue process with the different agencies of the United Nations system with a view to constructing permanent institutions and to safeguard civilians and population at risk (Costa Rica); 98.46. Initiate and implement, with OHCHR’s assistance, an action plan for the promotion of human rights in the country (Algeria); 98.47. Continue its measures to end the ongoing conflict and extend its authority to the whole territory (Azerbaijan); 98.48. Continue efforts to rebuild Somalia while taking into consideration the respect for human rights and international humanitarian law. (Turkey); 98.49. Expand its outreach and political reconciliation efforts as broadly as possible as part of comprehensive efforts to stabilize Somalia (United States of America); 98.50.  Strengthen efforts for national reconciliation in Somalia (Egypt);  98.51.  Accelerate efforts to ensure economic and social rights (Oman);  98.52.  Continue efforts to raise awareness concerning human rights by all  means at its disposal (Kuwait); 98.53. Increase efforts in the process of establishing peace and building a strong nation State, and enter into a true commitment to fulfilling national and international human rights obligations (Yemen); 98.54. Implement a comprehensive national policy to prevent the use or recruitment of child soldiers and undertake all efforts to provide opportunities, especially educational ones, for children (Uruguay); 98.55. Develop an integrated national plan of gender equality that criminalizes FGM and take practical measures to eradicate it, requesting the necessary assistance (Uruguay); 98.56. Put in place a Comprehensive Plan on Gender Equality that criminalizes FGM (Spain); 98.57. Issue a standing invitation to all special procedures and respond positively to all outstanding visit requests (Spain); 98.58. Make progress in providing gender equality that is inclusive and explicitly rejects historical discrimination (Hungary); 98.59. Take into account, in its efforts to promote and protect human rights, the specific needs of such vulnerable groups as children, women, persons with disabilities and the elderly (Thailand); 98.60. Take specific measures  to counter serious violations of the human rights of women, such as gender-based violence, inadequate after-care for victims of such crimes, forced marriage, and female genital mutilation (Japan); 98.61. Utmost efforts should be made to address issues affecting children, including poverty, the recruitment of under-age soldiers, and a lack of access to education (Japan); 98.62. Take concrete measures to ensure governing authorities are representative of all Somalis including women and minority groups (United Kingdom); 98.63. Introduce as soon as possible a moratorium on executions (Belgium); 98.64. Establish as soon as possible a moratorium on the application of the death penalty, in view of its abolition (France); 98.65. Immediately establish the moratorium on executions with a view to abolishing the death penalty (Germany); 98.66. Abolish the death penalty or at least establish a moratorium (Italy); 98.67. Follow through on its intent to put a moratorium on the use of the death penalty (Norway); 98.68. Establish a moratorium on the death penalty with a view to its abolition in the shortest delay and sign and ratify the second Optional Protocol to the ICCPR (Spain); 98.69. Establish a moratorium to the death sentence and eradicate the practice of death by stoning (Brazil); 98.70. Conduct timely and impartial investigations into the killings of Somali civil society actors and journalists and ensures that threats of violence against these individuals are investigated, and, where there is credible evidence of threats, take the necessary measures to ensure their personal security (Canada); 98.71. Undertake every effort to stop all violence in the context of the conflict, including summary executions, arbitrary, extrajudicial killings, amputations, floggings and the use of civilians as human shields (Slovakia); 98.72. Undertake prompt, effective and impartial investigations in the killings of all journalists in the territory under control of the Transitional Federal Government, and investigate threats of violence against them (Austria); 98.73. Issue clear, public orders and take clear steps to ensure that its security forces (and militias under its purview) comply with international human rights law and with international humanitarian law, including the principles of distinction and proportionality (Canada); 98.74. Issue clear public orders and take all necessary steps to ensure that the Transitional Federal Government’s security forces and allied militias comply with international humanitarian and human rights law (Austria); 98.75. Publicly order its security forces and all militia and forces affiliated with it not to commit unlawful attacks, including targeting civilians (Denmark); 98.76. In cooperation with AMISOM and its own security forces, take all necessary measures to protect the life of citizens (Islamic republic of Iran); 98.77. Take steps to ensure that all military engagement is undertaken in a manner consistent with international humanitarian law to minimize the sufferings of civilians (Turkey); 98.78. Adopt measures, including appropriate legislation, to eliminate all forms of violence against women (Slovenia); 98.79. Provide medical and psychological support, as well as legal assistance, to women victims of gender-based violence (Brazil); 98.80. Adopt measures to prevent, penalize and eliminate all forms of violence against women, including stoning, rape, marital rape, sexual violence of all kinds in the framework of armed conflict, domestic violence, forced marriage and FGM (Argentina); 98.81. Implement an awareness and education campaign, in cooperation with community and religious leaders, aimed at ending the practice of female genital mutilation and other forms of violence against women (Canada); 98.82. Redouble efforts to end traditional practices against human rights of women such as FGM (Mexico); 98.83. Establish effective and impartial vetting procedures to ensure that their armed forces and police do not recruit persons under the age of 18 (Hungary); 98.84. Take measures, such as impartial vetting, to ensure that persons under the age of 18 are not recruited by Transitional Federal Government’s security forces (Canada); 98.85. Immediately release all children recruited into the Transitional Federal Government’s security forces and the establishment of rigorous vetting procedures to ensure that the armed forces and police do not include persons under the age of 18 (Austria); 98.86. Continue with efforts to stop the recruitment and use of children in the country and to work closely with the United Nations and other relevant parties to ensure their demobilization (Malaysia); 98.87. Take decisive action where possible and introduce measures to ensure that no children under the age of 18 are recruited (Ireland); 98.88. Cease the use of children as combatants (United States of America); 98.89. Take every necessary measure to ensure that no children under the age of 18 are recruited into armed forces, releasing unconditionally all children previously recruited (Slovakia); 98.90. Actively seek the unconditional release of all children associated with its armed forces and those of its allies (Portugal); 98.91. Establish effective and impartial procedures to ensure that the armed forces and the police do not recruit persons under the age of 18 (Portugal); 98.92. Take all appropriate measures to eliminate these forms (child labour, child soldiers, and street begging) of exploitation of children (Slovenia); 98.93. Address the prevalence of exploitative child labor by enforcing its labor laws (United States of America); 98.94. Allow and support safe and timely access to all those in need of assistance in areas under the control of the Government (Ireland); 98.95. Provide for reintegration projects for children and women escaping from Al Shaabab-controlled areas (Italy); 98.96. Take further actions to ensure free humanitarian access and to engage the regional administrations and armed groups to work towards this end (Sweden); 98.97. Do its utmost to allow safe, timely and unimpeded access to humanitarian assistance (Australia); 98.98. Consider additional measures to guarantee the security of humanitarian aid organizations so they may undertake their work without risks (Chile); 98.99. Take serious steps in addressing the problem of widespread piracy attacks and robbery off the Somali coast including by cooperating with the international community in adopting the possible options identified by the Secretary-General to further the aim of prosecuting persons responsible for acts of piracy and armed robbery at sea (Malaysia); 98.100. Actively engage in efforts aiming at establishing an effective ban on payments of ransoms by foreign merchant navies, which undermine the human rights of all potential hostages as well as Somalis (Algeria); 98.101. Strengthen the judiciary in order to end the implementation of local customary law and a strategy to fight against impunity in the acting of militias and armed groups (Spain); 98.102. Establish, wherever necessary, independent and credible commissions of inquiry on war crimes and crimes against humanity (France); 98.103. Establish, in close collaboration with the international community, an independent international commission of inquiry or any other similar mechanism enabled to deal with human rights violations and international humanitarian law violations committed by all parties (Switzerland); 98.104. Ensure, in close cooperation with “Puntland” and “Somaliland”, that those responsible for atrocities are brought to justice in the framework of fair processes (Switzerland); 98.105. Investigate all allegations of violation of human rights and humanitarian law in a prompt, transparent and impartial manner (Thailand); 98.106. Adopt the necessary measures to ensure the investigation and prosecution of violations of the right to life and physical integrity, in light of human rights and international humanitarian law standards (Argentina); 98.107. Strengthen and where appropriate develop mechanisms to address impunity and incidences particularly of trafficking in persons and gender violence including sexual violence against women and children including through capacity building and technical assistance as requested by the TFG from relevant multilateral and bilateral partners (Malaysia); 98.108. Ensure as priority the protection of civilians by adopting appropriate measures to guarantee the respect for international humanitarian law (Switzerland); 98.109. Take steps to ensure that prompt, effective and impartial investigations are carried out into the killings of all Somali civil-society actors and journalists (Denmark); 98.110. Eradicate the continued impunity for perpetrators of crimes against freedom of expression (Netherlands); 98.111. That no amnesty should be granted for violence against women that qualifies as crimes against humanity, in line with Security Council resolutions 1325 (2000)  and 1820 (2008) (Portugal); 98.112. Amidst reports of systematic instances of rape and sexual violence against women and children, prosecute rape as a crime of war in accordance with Security Council resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008) (Israel); 98.113. Prosecute rape as a crime of war in accordance with Security Council resolutions 1325 (2005) and 1820 (2008) (Netherlands); 98.114. Devote attention to education and awareness-raising in the area of international humanitarian law and on human rights principles generally among the members of Government army and security forces as well as the AMISOM peacekeeping force (Yemen); 98.115. Ensure full respect for international humanitarian law (IHL) and also integrate IHL into the training programme of its armed and security forces, at all levels (Islamic Republic of Iran); 98.116. Provide training in human rights and international humanitarian law to TFG and AMISOM security and law enforcement forces (Australia); 98.117. Continue its constructive engagement with the Human Rights Council to enhance its capacity to improve the human rights situation in the country, especially in strengthening the administration of justice (Thailand); 98.118. Implement the recently adopted rules on the treatment of women prisoners and non-custodial measures for women offenders, otherwise known as the Bangkok Rules, and seek necessary support from such relevant agencies as the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) and OHCHR (Thailand); 98.119. Respect and protect freedom of expression and end all practices that threaten the right to freedom of expression, including threats against journalists and media outlets (Austria); 98.120. Put an end to all practices that threaten the right to freedom of expression, including threats against journalists and media outlets (Denmark); 98.121. Respect, in close cooperation with “Somaliland” and “Puntland”, freedom of expression and protect journalists and human rights defenders from abuses aimed at preventing them from exercising their legitimate activity (Switzerland); 98.122. Step up its efforts to guarantee freedom of expression as well as the safety of journalists in the country (Indonesia); 98.123. Undertake an independent investigation into allegations of journalists in all parts of Somalia facing severe threats and intimidations by authorities and armed opposition groups alike (Netherlands); 98.124. Uphold freedom of expression in all cases (United States of America); 98.125. Guarantee freedom of expression and protection of journalists and human rights defenders (Netherlands); 98.126. Guarantee the practice of freedom of expression and of the press (Spain); 98.127. Unequivocally express itself and act in support of freedom of speech for journalists, in accordance with the transitional federal charter (Norway); 98.128. Put an end to all forms of media censorship (Belgium); 98.129. Promote the inclusion of Somali women in the peace process and in public and political life in general (Portugal); 98.130. Strive to obtain additional assistance from the relevant international institutions in order to confront the problem of poverty and unemployment in the country (Saudi Arabia); 98.131. Take additional measures in order to provide for the basic needs of the population and to ensure economic, social and cultural rights, with the assistance of international donors and the relevant international organizations (Egypt); 98.132. Strive to deliver basic services to the local population, protect freedom of expression and raise awareness of gender-based violence (Australia); 98.133. Seek assistance for the immediate implementation, by the international community, of Security Council resolution 1964 (2010) so as to create means for the delivery of basic social services to the population (Kuwait); 98.134. Continue implementing programmes and measures to improve the enjoyment of the rights to food, education and health, including in the search for the promotion of these rights in the areas that are not under control of the TFG (Cuba); 98.135. Establish free and compulsory primary education and ratify the Convention on the Rights of the Child and its Optional Protocols (Hungary); 98.136. Continue its efforts for educational opportunities, vocational training and income-generating opportunities (Azerbaijan); 98.137. Strengthen capacities and skills of educational institutions with a view to their rehabilitation (Oman); 98.138. Develop a national action plan with a view to ensure free and compulsory education (Uruguay); 98.139. Strengthen efforts to spread education, especially for women and children (Saudi Arabia); 98.140. Take the necessary steps to improve the situation of internally displaced persons in order to protect their most basic human rights (Hungary); 98.141. Improve the living conditions and safety situation of IDPs in settlements, to strengthen their protection, particularly of women and girls from sexual violence, including granting IDPs unhindered access to humanitarian assistance (Slovakia); 98.142. Work together with humanitarian and development actors to improve the living conditions and safety of IDPs, and strengthen the protection of women and girls from rape and domestic violence (Turkey); 98.143. Continue its commendable high level of cooperation and engagement with the United Nations mechanisms (Bangladesh); 98.144. Continue to cooperate with the African Union and the United Nations mechanisms established to assist with the resolution of the situation in Somalia (South Africa); 98.145. Continue its efforts with the technical and financial assistances from the internal community and with the help of the relevant United Nations agencies and bodies for institution-building required for promoting and protecting human rights in the country (Bangladesh); 98.146. Seek the international assistance for strengthening the capabilities of the State structures and security institutions, while continuing its measures in this regard (Azerbaijan); 98.147. Seek technical and financial support of the international community to improve its human rights infrastructure (Pakistan); 98.148. Continue efforts to obtain international assistance and technical expertise for the promotion of human rights (Oman); 98.149. Seek technical assistance from the United Nations system and the international community to overcome the enormous human rights challenges faced by the country, in accordance with its national priorities (Nigeria); 98.150. Engage in technical cooperation with the international human rights mechanisms with a view to the revival of the Government institutions in Somalia (Saudi Arabia); 98.151. Actively contribute to drafting the roadmap and benchmarks envisaged by Human Rights Council resolution 15/28 in cooperation with OHCHR and priority be given to capacity-building in the judicial sector (Italy); 98.152. Seek technical and financial assistance envisaged within the UPR framework for support of the implementation of recommendations which Somalia accepts as well as commitments made outside this review (Morocco); 98.153. Seek assistance from the international community to take efforts to provide technical assistance and training necessary to build capacities in the areas of legislative work, the judiciary, security, education, and care for IDPs and persons with disabilities (Kuwait); 98.154. Continue to request technical assistance and capacity-building from OHCHR and the international community (Israel); 98.155. Continue to seek international assistance in order to enhance the capacity to protect human rights in the country (Indonesia). 99. All conclusions and/or recommendations contained in the present report reflect the position of the submitting State(s) and/or the State under review. They should not be construed as being endorsed by the Working Group as a whole. Annex Composition of the delegation The delegation of Somalia was headed by H.E. Mrs. Zahra Mohamed Ali Samantar, State Minister at the Office of the Prime Minister of the Transitional Federal Government of the Republic of Somalia and national focal point of child protection and human rights, and composed of the following members: • H.E. Dr. Maryan Qasim Ahmed, the Minister of Women’s Development and Family Welfare of the Transitional Government of the Republic of Somalia; • H.E. Mrs. Asha	 Gelle Diriye, Minister of Women’s Development and Family Welfare of the Puntland State of Somalia; • Ambassador Yusuf Mohamed Ismail Bari-Bari, Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary, Permanent Representative of Somalia to the United Nations Office in Geneva; • Dr. Omar Abdulle Alasow, the independent consultant of the Transitional Federal Government of the Republic of Somalia for the UPR process. 