  United Nations  A/HRC/19/11    General Assembly  Distr.: General 24 January 2012  Original: English  Human Rights Council Nineteenth session Agenda item 6 Universal Periodic Review   Report of the Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review* **  * The annex to the present report is circulated as received.  ** Late submission.   Syrian Arab Republic Contents  Paragraphs Page   Introduction .............................................................................................................  1–4 3  I Summary of the proceedings of the review process ................................................  5–99 3   A. Presentation by the State under review ...........................................................  5–18 3   B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review ........................  19–99 5  II. Conclusions and/or recommendations .....................................................................  100–106 14  Annex   Composition of the delegation .........................................................................................................  26 Introduction 1. The Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review, established in accordance with Human Rights Council resolution 5/1 of 18 June 2007, held its twelfth session from 3 to 14 October 2011. The review of the Syrian Arab Republic was held at the 9th meeting on 7 October 2011. The delegation of Syria was headed by Mr. Faysal Mekdad, Vice-Minister for Foreign Affairs. At its 13th meeting held on 11 October 2011, the Working Group adopted the report on Syria. 2. On 21 June 2010, the Human Rights Council selected the following group of rapporteurs (troika) to facilitate the review of Syria: Djibouti, Mexico and Saudi Arabia. 3. In accordance with paragraph 15 of the annex to resolution 5/1, the following documents were issued for the review of Singapore:  (a) A national report submitted and a written presentation made in accordance with paragraph 15 (a) (A/HRC/WG.6/12/SYR/1);   (b) A compilation prepared by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) in accordance with paragraph 15 (b) (A/HRC/WG.6/12/SYR/2);  (c) A summary prepared by OHCHR in accordance with paragraph 15 (c) (A/HRC/WG.6/12/SYR/3). 4. A list of questions prepared in advance by Canada, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Ireland, the Netherlands, Norway, Slovenia and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland was transmitted to the Syrian Arab Republic through the troika. These questions are available on the extranet of the universal periodic review (UPR).  I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process  A. Presentation by the State under review 5. In its opening statement, the Syrian Arab Republic affirmed its appreciation for the importance of the UPR process as a universal and non-selective mechanism, and expressed the hope for a constructive interactive dialogue. Syria had contributed to the development of the Human Rights Council mechanisms and hoped that the review would not become a tool to politicize the question of human rights.   6. The national report had been prepared through a collective institutional process, initiated by a decision of the Prime Minister, taken over a year in advance, to form a national committee headed by the Vice-Minister for Foreign Affairs and comprising representatives from different government entities as well as non-governmental organizations concerned with human rights. 7. Syria reiterated that it continued its efforts to strengthen human rights and build a democratic society in line with fundamental rule of law principles. It reaffirmed the universality of human rights, which did not belong to any single civilization or culture or religion. The principle of democracy also had to include democratic relations between countries, without the domination of the strong over the weak. 8. During the past seven months, Syria had experienced many threats and was subjected to a media war conducted through misinformation and lies. Syria was faced with the hegemony of the West, the United States of America and Israel, and was the target of terrorist threats. For this reason, the law enforcement organs faced many challenges. The Government would submit to the High Commissioner for Human Rights a list of martyrs among the police and security officials, over 1,100 of whom had been killed by terrorists who received support from some neighbouring countries. These countries, whose actions violated the right to life, were the same countries that were holding conferences on human rights and democracy. 9. Syria noted that the killings were accompanied by incitement in the regional and international media, which provided instructions and directed these criminal activities. Billions of dollars had been smuggled into Syria in recent months and distributed among extremists, arms dealers, drug traffickers and criminal organizations, and pay TV channels were fabricating footage available to those paying the highest price. Syria asserted that it was in a position to provide the Human Rights Council with audio-visual evidence exposing the lies of these TV stations and their backers, and indicated that the Council procedures as explained by the Bureau did not allow for the viewing of a short video supporting the State’s assertion in this regard. Syria referred to numerous media stories about Zeinab El-Hosni, the girl who allegedly had been murdered by the security forces, but who in fact was alive and well and had given her testimony on Syrian television. 10. Syria was situated in an explosive region, as a result of colonialism and policies of occupation, and it had suffered from political, economic and social problems. While it could accept advice from some African, Asian and Latin American countries, the Western colonial powers had no right to give advice on human rights, especially after having killed over 50,000 Libyans only a short while ago, and a million Iraqis after the American invasion, as well as thousands in Côte d’Ivoire and central Africa, without mentioning Abu Ghraib and Guantanamo. Western countries did not care about human rights, but only sought to secure their supply of oil and mineral resources. If they truly cared about human rights they would also care about the rights of the Palestinian people and not use their veto against them. 11. The President of Syria had undertaken a number of reform measures, including political reforms towards pluralism and democracy, by holding elections and granting freedom of the media. However, so-called humanitarian problems should not be used by the United Nations and the Human Rights Council as grounds for interference in Syrian affairs, which would only serve to justify aggression against Syria and plans for a Western and Israeli hegemony in the region. 12. The fact that Syria had received delegations from the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) demonstrated that it had nothing to hide. Syria was willing to benefit from any advice provided by true friends to make further progress in its socio-economic development, including in the area of human rights. The President had issued a decree providing for the freedom to establish parties, and progress had been made with the permits for over 15 new political parties. Local government elections would be held in December within the framework of the new Election Law, and parliamentary elections were planned for February, which would complete the reforms desired by the Syrian people. 13. Since the early stages of the recent events, the President had addressed their causes by issuing a number of decrees and decisions, including on the repeal of the Emergency Law and the abolition of the Supreme State Security Court, as well as three decrees on a general amnesty and a law on the right to peaceful demonstration. In addition, an independent judicial committee had been established to investigate the events and the circumstances which had led to the death of both civilians and military personnel. The door for dialogue had remained open throughout, with the aim of ensuring broad participation in the search for solutions to the political, economic and social problems. Within this framework, consultations had been held for a comprehensive national dialogue. However, some of those people who had called for a national dialogue used this as a pretext to continue to commit acts of violence, including killings, and to fabricate false accusations against the security forces, as part of the media war against Syria. 14. The two resolutions adopted by the Human Rights Council were based on such false accusations. These resolutions should be set aside, and the work of the Council be rectified to ensure truth, clarity and transparency. 15. Despite the difficulties which Syria was facing, the national committee had prepared a comprehensive report on the human rights situation in the State. The report also referred to provisions on human rights contained in the Constitution. Syria was currently in the process of reviewing the Constitution with a view to strengthening human rights protection in all areas. 16. However, the human rights culture had been afflicted by a dangerous disease, as the Western countries acted as if human rights were a cultural product that they were bringing to the developing countries. At the same time, the human rights record of some Western countries was less than honourable, in particular when they invaded other countries and pursued a policy of double standards and sanctions in different international forums, thus turning human rights into a tool to ensure their hegemony over other countries in the international arena.  17. Syrians wished their culture to emanate from their own values and history, which dated back to around 10000 B.C. Syria was committed to the fundamental values common to the civilizations of the world, such as freedom, justice, independence, sovereignty, family traditions, and the eradication of poverty and corruption, and it abided by its human rights obligations. 18. The Syrian people were convinced that their future lay in the harmony of all their components, and that their children should be raised in an environment free from hatred, and where justice worked for all citizens. The Syrian people had given their support to that goal and were committed to continuing on that path.   B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review 19. During the interactive dialogue, 51 delegations made statements. A number of delegations welcomed the participation of the Syrian Arab Republic in the universal periodic review and appreciated its cooperation despite the difficult situation in the country. Additional statements which could not be delivered during the interactive dialogue owing to time constraints are posted on the extranet of the universal periodic review when available.1 Recommendations made during the dialogue are to be found in section II of the present report.  1 Argentina, Austria, Botswana, Denmark, Hungary, Italy, Latvia, Mauritania, Nigeria, Romania, Uganda, Yemen. 20. Cuba welcomed the adoption of a number of measures and the opening of a dialogue with the opposition. It also noted the lifting of the state of emergency, the establishment of an independent judiciary, and the promulgation of new laws for political parties. Cuba made recommendations. 21. Nicaragua stated that it was necessary to take into account the difficult situation in which Syria found itself. It was ready to accompany Syria on the road to peace and reconciliation. Nicaragua made recommendations. 22. The Russian Federation was convinced that a stable and democratic development could only be achieved through a constructive dialogue and the implementation of the announced political reforms and social and economic transformations. It made recommendations. 23. The Plurinational State of Bolivia regretted that the translation of the Syrian national report had not been received in due time. It referred to the recognition by Syria of the legitimate claims of its people, the lifting of the state of emergency, and the fight against corruption. The Plurinational State of Bolivia made recommendations. 24. Ecuador reaffirmed the right of peoples to self-determination, the respect of sovereignty and territorial integrity and the principle of non-intervention in the internal affairs of other States. It recognized that the only way forward was that of peace and reconciliation. Ecuador made recommendations. 25. The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela stated that, despite serious difficulties and suffering, Syria had sent a message of commitment to human rights. It drew attention to the efforts made by Syria to achieve peace and national reconciliation by promoting reforms to ensure economic and social rights. It reiterated its support for the efforts by Syria to preserve national unity and stability when faced with the siege of imperialism. It made recommendations. 26. Japan was deeply concerned by the use of force in response to peaceful protests. It reiterated the need to introduce political reforms, to take account of the aspirations of the Syrian people with regard to how they are governed. Japan took a positive note of the ratification by Syria of many core international human rights instruments. It made recommendations. 27. Uruguay reiterated its preoccupation with the violent repression of peaceful protests and the increase of acts contrary to international human rights law and international humanitarian law. It noted with satisfaction the adoption of the Plan of Action (2005–2009) for the World Programme for Human Rights Education and the withdrawal of reservations to the Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC). Uruguay made recommendations. 28. Algeria supported all efforts similar to those being undertaken in other parts of the Arab world, as Algeria itself had undergone intensive reform. It stressed the efforts of Syria to promote and protect human rights. It asked how Syria had been able to achieve the Millennium Development Goals and encouraged it to cooperate constructively with the recommendations emanating from the interactive dialogue. Algeria made recommendations.  29. The Czech Republic urged a stop to the crackdowns on protests, which had resulted in hundreds of civilian casualties, including women and children. Syria should make a genuine effort to comply with the Security Council Presidential Statement of 3 August 2011 and put an end to the use of force against protesters. It made recommendations. 30. The United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland remained deeply concerned about the brutal suppression of thousands of peaceful protestors and strongly urged the Government to cease arbitrary executions, arbitrary detention, torture, ill-treatment and enforced disappearances of thousands of citizens. It asked whether steps had been taken to implement the announced lifting of the state of emergency. It made recommendations. 31. The United States of America condemned the Government’s gross violations of human rights resulting in over 2,900 civilians killed in military and security operations. It noted that the mass arrests, arbitrary detentions, torture and targeted killings by the Government continued unabated, and called upon President Assad to step aside immediately.2 It made recommendations.  2 Cuba made a point of order stating that it was entirely unacceptable for the United States to call upon the Syrian authorities to step down immediately. Neither the Human Rights Council, nor any other United Nations forum, was the appropriate forum for such request. The President of the Human Rights Council urged all delegations to remember that points of order were for raising procedural matters, and called on the delegation to continue the dialogue in the Council’s customary climate of respect. 32. Bangladesh acknowledged that Syria was going through a political turmoil. It noted progress in social and economic rights and commended the country for hosting a large number of refugees. It urged all concerned to give up violence, ensure the protection of innocent civilians, and engage in a constructive, inclusive and transparent dialogue to resolve the ongoing impasse. Bangladesh made recommendations. 33. France stated that around 3,000 persons, including children, had been killed in the repression of peaceful protests, that at least 10,000 persons, including women and children, were in detention, and that more than 100 people had died under torture. It noted the statement of the High Commissioner for Human Rights that some of these crimes might be qualified as crimes against humanity. France made recommendations. 34. The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea commended Syria on its efforts to maintain security and stability. It highlighted the importance of respect for the sovereignty, territorial integrity and independence of Syria. It indicated that any solution could only be the outcome of Syrian-led policies without foreign intervention. It made recommendations.  35. The Islamic Republic of Iran noted the establishment of several human rights mechanisms as well as achievements in economic, social and cultural rights. It welcomed the announcement by Syria of reforms intended to bring comprehensive change and a better future for the Syrian people. It asked about measures to end the human rights violations committed in the occupied Golan. It made recommendations.  36. Lebanon inquired about steps to provide youth with opportunities for employment. It noted that it had a long-standing and strong brotherly relationship with Syria, rooted in geography, history, culture and social proximity. It was on this basis that Lebanon wished for the stability and prosperity of Syria, and for progress in the promotion and protection of human rights, especially in those difficult times. Lebanon made recommendations. 37. Slovakia reiterated its regret over the failure of Syria to grant access to the fact-finding mission established by the Human Rights Council in its resolution S-16/1. It stated that Syria had lost legitimacy due to human rights violations that may amount to crimes against humanity. Slovakia made recommendations. 38. Brazil was seriously concerned over the human rights situation in Syria. It condemned acts of violence perpetrated by all sides and stated that the violent response to peaceful protests was unacceptable. It appreciated efforts to ensure food security, improve health indicators and address protection issues for refugees raised by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. It made recommendations. 39. Turkey called on Syria to respect international human rights and amend laws that obstruct fundamental freedoms, and to stop its security forces from using live ammunition against protesters. It urged Syria to promptly investigate and prosecute those responsible for deaths in custody and to cooperate fully with the Human Rights Council and other international organizations. 40. Syria expressed its satisfaction with many elements of the dialogue, but considered that some comments by countries such as the United States amounted to interference in the domestic affairs of Syria and were characterized by contradictions and double standards.    41. Comments relating to the alleged use of weapons against citizens were a result of the global media campaign against Syria, which gave a distorted picture of the situation. Security forces had been deployed to keep the peace, but many of them had been killed, including unarmed police officers. In the case of the city of Hama, security forces had stayed outside the city for 50 days so that a dialogue could be established. When they finally intervened they tried to avoid casualties, but they were attacked by armed groupings. Similarly, in the city of Homs, there had been supposedly peaceful demonstrations, but then some elements began to target police officers, murdering 12 of them. The Government usually did not even arm its security forces when they went to such demonstrations. There was also false information on the use of tanks, which had not been used against demonstrators, but had been deployed only for the rescue of police officers who were overwhelmed and had no means to defend themselves. They had never fired on demonstrators. 42. Regarding comments on alleged bans on certain Internet sites, Syria referred to clear Presidential instructions allowing full access to Internet sites, including social media, contrary to what had happened in other parts of the world. 43. Syria further explained that the judicial committee tasked with the investigation of the recent events was totally independent and transparent, composed of highly qualified judges known for their impartiality. A large number of cases were under investigation. 44. The delegation noted that, while many protests had been conducted in full legality, others had taken place without notification and disrupted public order. 45. Concerning efforts to fight trafficking in persons, Syria referred to the issue of Decree No. 3 in 2010, which set out a framework to combat trafficking. Two centres for victims had been opened, in Damascus and Aleppo. 46. As regards capital punishment, the delegation assured that the strictest controls were in place for its application, and that it could be considered as almost suspended. 47. Concerning a question on differences in wages between men and women, the delegation stated that no discrimination existed in this regard, and that the salary depended solely on the type of work performed. Regarding comments on youth unemployment, Syria noted that thousands of new jobs had been created and that further steps would be taken in that direction. 48. Commenting on questions concerning the realization of the Millennium Development Goals, the delegation stated that Syria had incorporated the Goals in its development plans. Since 2003, Syria had issued national reports on the implementation of those objectives. Among others, there had been significant improvements in the indicators for poverty and food security. Major efforts had also been made in the field of education. 49. On questions regarding child labour, Syria referred to a national law prohibiting the recruitment of children and adolescents. Syria worked in cooperation with the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) and the International Labour Organization, especially regarding the worst forms of child labour. 50. On freedom of associations, the delegation informed that associations could be formed through the submission of a request to Ministry for Social Affairs and Labour. Permissions were granted if an application met the legal requirements and if the relevant association would make a positive contribution to Syrian society. 51. China stated that maintaining peace and stability in Syria would be in the interest of the Syrian people and the international community. All parties must exercise maximum restraint and avoid violence. An inclusive political process should be launched. The Government should implement reforms, and all parties should participate in the political process. Any assistance from the international community should be constructive. 52. Malaysia noted with concern the deteriorating human rights situation. It reiterated the call on all parties to exercise maximum restraint and spare no effort in starting dialogue and peaceful negotiations. It stated that wide-ranging economic sanctions imposed on countries could lead to deprivation of basic needs and services. It made recommendations. 53. Slovenia expressed concern over the current situation and regretted that violence and repression by the security forces against the civilian population, arbitrary detentions, arrests of human rights activists, and killings of human rights defenders still continued. It welcomed that Syria had adopted the Plan of Action (2005–2009) for the World Programme for Human Rights Education. Slovenia made recommendations. 54. Viet Nam took note of efforts in ensuring the enjoyment of all human rights, especially economic, social and cultural rights. It applauded Syria for its commitment to political reform to better protect and promote fundamental rights and freedoms. It expressed its concern over rising violence that had a serious impact on fundamental rights and freedoms, in particular those of women and children. Viet Nam made recommendations. 55. Germany found it unacceptable that the ongoing brutal human rights violations had not been raised in the Syrian national report. It noted that Syria had not undertaken any steps to rescind the decrees granting immunity for crimes committed on duty, with resulting impunity for acts of torture committed by members of the security services, intelligence agencies and police. Germany made a recommendation. 56. Zimbabwe was aware that the national report was prepared under very challenging circumstances. It commended the commitment of Syria to human rights and its international obligations in spite of the foreign interference. Zimbabwe was encouraged by efforts to promote dialogue and reconciliation. It noted that the imposition of economic sanctions violated fundamental human rights and called for an end to foreign interference. 57. Myanmar welcomed positive measures, particularly the introduction of the plan of action for human rights education for the school system. It noted the pledge by Syria to continue engaging with the Council. It also welcomed successful efforts to ensure food security and create advanced health care. Myanmar made a recommendation. 58. South Africa sought clarification on concrete measures to facilitate gender equality, given the concerns expressed by the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women on the stereotypical role of women, the revision of the Personal Status Act, and measures to address gender-based violence. It asked about changes envisaged in relation to the prison review process. It welcomed reform initiatives and expressed deep concern at the ongoing violence. South Africa made recommendations. 59. Belarus positively noted the accession by Syria to most core human rights treaties and the lifting of reservations. However, Syria had been faced with sanctions, which had a negative impact on the enjoyment of economic and social rights. Sanctions also aggravated the humanitarian situation in the country. Belarus made recommendations. 60. Switzerland noted that, despite the Human Rights Council’s two special sessions on Syria, human rights violations of extraordinary gravity had not ceased, and fundamental human rights were not respected. It was shocked by the violence used by the security services and by numerous reports of ill-treatment, torture and enforced disappearances. Switzerland made recommendations. 61. Thailand expressed its apprehension over the current socio-economic and political challenges, which should be resolved through an internally led political process, based on an inclusive and credible national dialogue. Such reconciliation could not flourish in a climate of impunity. It commended Syria for positive steps such as the provision of health care to over 1.5 million Iraqi refugees and the granting of citizenship to the Kurdish population earlier this year. Thailand made recommendations. 62. Canada was greatly concerned by the grave human rights situation in Syria. Five decades of imposed restrictions had been further exacerbated by the violent repression. It wished for the people of Syria a government that respected freedom, democracy, human rights, and the rule of law, reminded its call on President Assad and his supporters to step down immediately and looked forward to working with a new Syrian government to improve respect for human rights. Canada made recommendations. 63. The Sudan regretted the loss of lives, and noted efforts in promoting and protecting human rights and to address the current situation, including the lifting of the state of emergency. The Sudan commended achievements in women rights, including for women living under foreign occupations, and the right of education for all, including in remote areas. It asked about efforts to combat illiteracy. The Sudan made recommendations. 64. Norway stated that political prisoners were systematically exposed to ill-treatment and torture in overcrowded and often improvised detention facilities, and also cited recent reports of systematic monitoring and harassment of protesters outside of Syria by agents believed to be acting on behalf of the Government. Norway made recommendations. 65. Indonesia remained deeply concerned and deplored the use of force against civilians. It noted the lifting of the state of emergency in April 2011, which provided the opportunity to bring the situation back to normalcy, through a democratic political process. Indonesia made recommendations. 66. Chile stated that the situation in Syria was causing deep concerns in Chilean society. It called upon Syria to generate conditions to put an end to violence and repression, guaranteeing human rights and fundamental freedoms, particularly the right to demonstrate. It was important to bring to justice those responsible. The state of emergency needed to be lifted in order to protect human rights. Chile made recommendations. 67. Australia noted that over 2,700 Syrians had been killed in protests demanding reform and democratic freedoms, and condemned the murder of overwhelmingly non-violent protesters and the torture of detainees. It urged Syria to implement the recommendations of the High Commissioner’s report and reiterated its call to the Security Council to refer Syria to the International Criminal Court. Australia called on President Assad to step aside to allow credible democratic reforms to take place. Australia made recommendations. 68. In relation to comments provided by different speakers, the delegation noted that Syria respected and accepted the views and advice of friends, but could not accept false accusations made without any proof. 69. Concerning calls for an accelerated dialogue, Syria again acknowledged the importance of dialogue, which had been initiated already at the beginning of the events. Two weeks earlier, consultations had been held in all provinces of the country, as part of the comprehensive national dialogue, and another round of consultations was planned to be held in the coming weeks.  70. The delegation emphasized however that some of those calling for change were not willing to engage in dialogue but rather manipulated the emotions of people, including at the time of Friday prayers, when people coming out of the mosques and engaging in demonstrations were joined by armed elements and extremists, who falsely purported to represent the whole people.  71. The delegation reported that there was a clear timeline for the dialogue and reform process, with municipal elections to be conducted within a month and a half and parliamentary election in February next year, once the new parties would have been constituted according to the new guidelines.  72. Concerning a suggestion for Syria to ratify the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court, the delegation noted that the Court could be exploited to threaten the territorial integrity and sovereignty of States and to punish those who the West wished to punish. Some major powers such as the United States themselves had not ratified the Rome Statute.  73. The delegation asserted that Syria gave full access to all humanitarian operations in Syria, and expressed in pride in hosting and providing for many refugees, including over a million Iraqi refugees, and about half a million Palestinian refugees since 1948, in addition to about half a million Syrian internally displaced persons from the occupied Golan.  74. In response to comments by Canada, Syria expressed its consternation at the hostility demonstrated towards Syria and questioned what the real intention was behind its calls for reforms and human rights, noting that it had rejected all calls for human rights for the Palestinian people and shown itself hostile to the pride and dignity of developing nations. Accordingly, the delegation rejected any interference in the internal affairs of Syria, which ran counter to international law. 75. The delegation stressed that Syria was a country comprising different ethnic groups and civilizations. However, the term “minority” was not a notion that was legally supported in Syria as every person had equal rights, regardless of their race, colour or religion. 76. The delegation commented on elements included in the statements of the United States, Norway and Canada, regarding freedom of opinion and the rights of demonstrators. The delegation stated that Syria guaranteed the right to freedom of expression, opinion and belief, and that limitations were imposed only insofar as the exercise of these rights interfered with the rights of others, especially through libel or insult.  77. Concerning human rights defenders, the delegation stated that there were more than 15,000 lawyers in Syria, many of whom worked on human rights issues. Allegations concerning the harassment of rights defenders were incorrect.  78. The delegation was surprised to hear comments on an insufficient representation of women in public life, as United Nations bodies, such as the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women had indicated that great efforts had been made by the Government in that area. Women could occupy any position, and their equal rights were guaranteed by the law.  79. Regarding queries on illiteracy, the delegation noted that efforts for its eradication were ongoing in accordance with the national development plan, and that the rate of illiteracy had been brought down to 14 per cent. 80. The Netherlands stated that Syria should extend cooperation to the commission of inquiry established by the Human Rights Council. Radical change was needed to improve the protection of human rights. The violence against peaceful protesters since March 2011 was unacceptable. Syria should respect the right to life, the freedom of expression and opinion, and the freedom of assembly. The Netherlands made recommendations. 81. Belgium regretted that the human rights situation had not improved after two special sessions of the Human Rights Council. It was concerned by reports of extrajudicial executions, arrests, arbitrary detentions, enforced disappearances, and excessive use of force against detainees. It asked what urgent measures Syria was taking to make its legislative system more transparent. Belgium made recommendations. 82. Ireland urged Syria to immediately desist from the unacceptable use of violence against peaceful protestors and to heed the condemnation expressed across the world at the shocking loss of life that resulted. It strongly urged Syria to extend its full cooperation to the international commission of inquiry established by the Human Rights Council and to grant it free access to its territory. Ireland made recommendations. 83. Maldives expressed its concerns about the killings of 2,700 protestors, including children. While welcoming the lifting of the state of emergency and the commitment to undertaking reforms, it noted a lack of progress in implementation. It called for an end to the violence and urged the authorities to allow people to protest peacefully and to address demands for reforms. Maldives made recommendations. 84. India welcomed reform measures aimed at improving the democratic system and strengthening public freedoms. India noted the commitment by Syria to realizing the right to health, and to provide health care for up to 1.5 million Iraqi refugees. It appreciated that Syria had granted citizenship to the Kurdish population in Hassake. India requested further information on the work of the Commission for Family Affairs. 85. The Republic of Korea appreciated the engagement of Syria with the international human rights mechanisms, such as the current UPR session. It restated its grave concern at the situation in Syria and urged the Government to stop the violence against its own citizens, hold perpetrators accountable and respect its obligations under international human rights law. The Republic of Korea made recommendations. 86. Spain stated that systematic violations of human rights and violent repression of peaceful demonstrations had led the Human Rights Council to hold two extraordinary sessions. Syria must cooperate with the Council and allow the commission of inquiry access to the country. Spain made recommendations. 87. Poland noted with regret the reports of systematic violations of human rights and the lack of cooperation with OHCHR. It was particularly concerned by reported human rights abuses, including indiscriminate violations of the right to life, mass arrests, targeted killings and the lack of judicial independence. Poland made recommendations. 88. Costa Rica expressed its extreme concern at the number of persons who lost their lives in violent incidents, which exceeds by far that of any of the other countries in the region with an unstable political situation. The number of reported human rights violations was equally alarming. 89. Guatemala recognized the improvements in main health indicators and efforts to guarantee food security. However, Syria should fight discrimination and violence against women and children. Guatemala was concerned about the recent events and condemned the ongoing loss of lives. It called upon Syria to abstain from using force and abide by the international obligations to protect, especially women and children. Guatemala made recommendations. 90. Peru regretted that Syria did not live up to the commitments made in March 2011 to uphold the highest standards in the protection of human rights. It also regretted that Syria had not granted access to OHCHR as per Human Rights Council resolution S-16/1. It noted that Syria had not extended a standing invitation to special procedures and did not authorize access to the Special Rapporteur on torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment and the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights defenders. Peru made recommendations. 91. Mexico urged Syria to immediately put an end to the escalating violence against peaceful political demonstrators, respecting their right to the freedoms of expression and assembly. Mexico also appealed to Syria to open the door to an inclusive dialogue that responds to the legitimate requests of the people. Mexico made recommendations. 92. Kyrgyzstan condemned the use of force against peaceful demonstrators and urged all parties to show restraint. It hoped that Syria would implement the announced political reforms, and welcomed steps to amend legislation under which prisoners of conscience had been jailed, and to regulate peaceful assembly and the establishment of political parties. It urged Syria to fully cooperate with the commission of inquiry. It made recommendations. 93. Sweden was concerned that the indiscriminate and disproportionate use of violence was continuing. It referred to repeated promises to investigate and prosecute all crimes against civilians and security personnel. It also noted a policy of arbitrary arrests and detention by security and military forces, and reports of enforced disappearances, including of children, and of detainees being held in unofficial detention centres. Sweden made recommendations. 94. Commenting on observations made by the Netherlands, Syria reaffirmed its continued engagement in comprehensive reform, but rejected allegations that persons wounded in the recent events did not have access to health care or to hospitals. The delegation furthermore regretted that in all the statements made concerning protesters, there was no mention of the presence of armed gangs, although more than 1,100 members of the military and security forces had been killed. 95. The delegation stressed that Syria was cooperating with the human rights mechanisms, noting that last year, Syria had received visits from the Special Rapporteur on the right to food and the Special Rapporteur on the right of everyone to the enjoyment of the highest attainable standard of physical and mental health, and it would welcome more such visits once the situation returned to normal. 96. Concerning queries on the Kurdish population, the delegation stated that they were an integral part of the citizenship of Syria, and that there was no discrimination against them or any other citizens based on race, ethnicity or origin. 97. On allegations concerning massive arrests, detentions and killings, Syria assured that such information was unfounded, as arrests only targeted those who were breaking the law and attacking private and public property. Such persons were detained according to the law, and there were no enforced disappearances. Detention centres and prisons were constantly monitored. The ICRC had visited prisons and not found any cases of torture or enforced disappearance. Last year, the Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances had considered similar accusations and concluded that they were unfounded. Concerning the alleged impunity of security personnel involvement in torture, the delegation assured that it could give to the Human Rights Council the names of officers who had committed violations and had been referred to justice for prosecution. 98. Syria appreciated the constructive, positive observations and proposals made by friendly delegations, which would encourage Syria to continue its efforts for the protection and promotion of human rights. However, it noted that unfortunately some statements had deliberately politicized the issues and used hostile terminology, which did not serve the cause of human rights. 99. In conclusion, the delegation reaffirmed that Syria remained strong and would overcome the crisis. It had already made much progress in that regard. With its long history, Syria would continue to be a pioneer among the countries adhering to their human rights obligations. After completion of the reforms initiated by the President it would be a model for democracy, with a multiparty system and full respect for human rights. Syria still needed some time to achieve this and hoped to return at the next review with a new image of Syria.  II. Conclusions and/or recommendations***  *** Conclusions and recommendations have not been edited. 100. The recommendations formulated during the interactive dialogue and listed below have been examined by Syria and enjoy its support: 100.1. Continue to harmonise its domestic laws with the international human rights conventions to which it is party, in line with  democratic principles and fundamental freedoms and equality (Indonesia); 100.2. Bring national laws fully into line with its obligations under ICCPR, CEDAW, CAT and CRC (Maldives); 100.3. Maintain the positive momentum in improving legislation and institutions, and ensure the execution of its laws in practice, in particular in the areas of education, women rights, childhood, persons with disabilities and victims of trafficking in persons (Venezuela); 100.4. Maintain a relation of cooperation with the universal system of promotion and protection of human rights (Uruguay); 100.5. Continue to strengthen cooperation with the Human Rights Council and its mechanisms (Bangladesh); 100.6. Deepen and widen cooperation with the United Nations human rights system, and in particular with the Human Rights Council and its mechanisms (Malaysia); 100.7. Establish a national human rights institution in line with the Paris Principles (Indonesia); 100.8. Establish a national human rights institution accredited by the International Coordinating Committee (Poland); 100.9. Establish a national institution for the promotion and protection of human rights with a broad mandate and independent membership (Bolivia); 100.10. Consider establishing additional national human rights mechanisms to promote and protect human rights (Lebanon); 100.11. Continue to implement measures to enhance national capacities for the promotion and protection of human rights (Belarus); 100.12. Continue to confront attempts of foreign intervention into its domestic affairs and to exercise fully its people’s right to self-determination and the country’s sovereignty (Cuba); 100.13. Continue the process of taking measures at the national level as well as the national dialogue under the guidance of its legitimate authorities as a means of a political solution to the situation in the country (Cuba); 100.14. Establish an inclusive national dialogue leading to free and fair multi-party elections as soon as possible (Maldives); 100.15. Make effective a genuine process of national dialogue with the opposition (Spain); 100.16. Find a formula to reinitiate a respectful dialogue between the various parties and to find a peaceful solution to the problem (Ecuador); 100.17. Take more tangible steps to promote and protect the human rights of its citizens, by continuing to engage all relevant parties in an open and meaningful dialogue (Iran); 100.18. Continue efforts to find peaceful solutions to any issues pertaining to the protection of human rights in the country, including through inclusive dialogues involving relevant civil societies (Indonesia); 100.19. Intensify an all-inclusive transparent process with a view to fulfilling the aspirations of all Syrian people (South Africa); 100.20. Continue to appropriately implement all changes promised to its people and strengthen the dialogue mechanisms with civil society (Bolivia); 100.21. End conflict and violence and reach a political solution through dialogue and national reconciliation in order to bring Syria back to a normal situation (Vietnam); 100.22. Accelerate and follow-up on implementation of the package of reforms as announced by the country’s leadership (Malaysia); 100.23. Expedite its reforms such as measures to raise citizens’ living standards and duly take into account the aspirations of the people of Syria in the reform process (Thailand); 100.24. Implement political and economic reforms conducted with the full participation of all social sectors for the development of the country and better ensure the fundamental rights and freedom for the people (Vietnam); 100.25. Make every effort to put an end to violence, implement genuine political reforms  at this critical juncture, and continue to work towards reaching a peaceful solution through negotiations and dialogue, in order to spare further bloodshed of the brotherly Syrian people, and preserve its security and stability and the unity of territorial integrity (Sudan); 100.26. Facilitate unfettered access to humanitarian aid and assistance, particularly to the regions and communities most affected by the conflict (Malaysia); 100.27. Provide unhindered access to humanitarian assistance to both its population and foreign nationals (Thailand); 100.28. Ensure broader opportunities for human rights training for the members of the security forces (Venezuela); 100.29. Multiply its efforts to involve in the decision-making the active participation of different social structures, especially those geared to combat poverty and social equality (Nicaragua); 100.30. Enhance policies and measures to protect social vulnerable groups, especially women, children and elderly persons (Vietnam); 100.31. Adopt a comprehensive national human rights plan of action and finalise the national plan for the protection of women and children (Indonesia); 100.32. Adopt a comprehensive National Plan of Action geared towards solving the issue of street children (Uruguay); 100.33. Further pursue policies and programmes which aim to improve the quality of social services, including health services and education (Russian Federation); 100.34. Submit overdue periodic reports, as required by treaties and conventions to which Syria is a party (Iran); 100.35. Strengthens efforts to further promote empowerment of women (Bangladesh); 100.36. Consider strengthening all measures aimed at promoting gender equity and the full  and effective participation of women in the political, social, economic and cultural spheres of life, including through legislative and administrative means (South Africa); 100.37. Immediately adopt and implement necessary legislative and administrative measures to promote a greater inclusion of women in the country’s public and political life, ensuring that they effectively participate in the decision-making process, and lift the reservations made to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (Mexico); 100.38. Step up efforts to prevent and combat trafficking in persons, in particular women and children (Belarus); 100.39. Ensure transparent and effective national investigations into all cases of violence and all cases of deaths and bring those responsible to justice (Russian Federation); 100.40. Put into place domestic measures and mechanisms aimed at strengthening accountability and ensure redress and reparations for victims of possible human rights violations (Malaysia); 100.41. Strengthen efforts to prevent violence against and abuse of children (Bangladesh); 100.42. Ensure freedom of expression in conformity with the principles of the Constitution and adopt additional measures to put this in practice (Russian Federation); 100.43. Implement the right to life, freedom of expression and opinion and the freedom of assembly in day-to-day practice (Netherlands); 100.44. Adopt measures to ensure the rights of citizens to peaceful assembly under conditions of observance of public order and the safety of citizens and state and private establishments and organizations (Russian Federation); 100.45. Continue efforts to create an environment harmonizing citizens’ rights to peaceful protest with the need for security and integrity of the country and with efforts to maintain public order and protect public and private property (Venezuela); 100.46. Intensify youth programs and create more employment opportunities for young people (Iran); 100.47. Intensify youth programs and create more employment opportunities for youths (Lebanon); 100.48. Further pursue the policies and programs to improve quality and effectiveness of basic social services provided to its citizens (Lebanon); 100.49. Continue the efforts to strengthen food security for all its people, particularly in rural areas (Bolivia); 100.50. Continue to strengthen the achievements of health indicators, particularly related to child and maternal health, through the improvement of public health services (Bolivia); 100.51. Continue policies and programs to improve the quality of basic social services provided to citizens, such as health care and education (Democratic People’s Republic of Korea); 100.52. Continue to provide basic healthcare service for people living in rural areas and increase its focus on vulnerable groups such as women, children and minorities (Myanmar); 100.53. Continue to strengthen free education for all its people, particularly in rural areas, through “mobile schools” (Bolivia); 100.54. Continue improving the quality of public education with the aim of maintaining the excellent level of education by which the different stages of education have been characterized (Venezuela); 100.55. Continue with its policy and its good practice to provide assistance and protect the rights of the many Palestinian refugees in the country (Ecuador); 100.56. Continue its contribution to the efforts in alleviating the suffering of the vulnerable group of refugees until they return to their homeland (Algeria); 100.57. Continue to seek support from the international community and relevant United Nations agencies in meeting its challenges in hosting the refugee population (Thailand); 100.58. Enhance development efforts by focusing on the rural areas (Algeria); 100.59. Continue its efforts to halt the brain drain to foreign countries (Democratic People’s Republic of Korea); 100.60. Engage civil society in the process of implementation of UPR recommendations (Poland). 101. The following recommendations enjoy the support of Syria, which considers the recommendations as already implemented: 101.1. Amend legislation allowing the imprisonment of prisoners of conscience so as to be in compliance with the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (articles 18–22) (Belgium);  101.2. Ensure that the new legislation regulating freedom of assembly is brought in line with international human rights law, particularly the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, to which Syria has been a party since 1969 (Sweden); 101.3. Respect its international obligations pursuant to the United Nations human rights treaties to which it is a party (Belgium); 101.4. Publish a detailed roadmap of planned human rights and political reforms (Maldives); 101.5. Allow unhindered and sustained access for humanitarian agencies and workers and restore basic services including unhindered access to hospitals (Poland); 101.6. Take measures to address the low levels of representation of women in public and political life and in decision-making (Slovenia); 101.7. Take urgent measures to protect the most vulnerable groups, with particular attention to boys and girls (Chile); 101.8. Comply with commitments enshrined in the Durban Declaration and Plan of Action, particularly as regards the prevention and punishment of discrimination against the population of Kurdish origin (Mexico); 101.9. Take all necessary steps to ensure that torture and other inhuman and degrading treatment of civilians do not occur (Sweden); 101.10. Put an end to massive and indiscriminate detentions and proceed as soon as possible to free prisoners of conscience and people who have been arbitrarily arrested; and end the use of torture and ill-treatments (Spain); 101.11. Immediately and unconditionally release all those arbitrarily detained (Norway); 101.12. Release all prisoners of conscience and arbitrarily detained persons (Poland); 101.13. Free without delay prisoners of conscience and those who are arbitrarily detained (Switzerland); 101.14. Release prisoners of conscience and those arbitrarily detained, and immediately stop intimidation, persecutions and arbitrary arrests (Uruguay); 101.15. Ensure the immediate and unconditional release of all political prisoners, human rights defenders and detainees and make incommunicado detentions illegal (Sweden); 101.16. Take urgent action to release all prisoners who have been detained for exercising freedom of expression (Chile); 101.17. Allow all detainees access to lawyers immediately after their detention and bring them before a judge no later than 48 hours; and provide information about the whereabouts of disappeared persons (Spain); 101.18. Ensure that all detainees are afforded all fundamental safeguards from the outset of their detention, including the right to have prompt access to a lawyer and an independent medical examination and to notify a relative (Poland); 101.19. Establish an independent and impartial judiciary system (Switzerland); 101.20. Undertake reforms of the judicial system to ensure that the procedures are in conformity with international standards for an equitable judgment (article 14 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights) (Belgium); 101.21. Take steps to ensure that the freedoms of expression and association are fully respected as called for by the 16th Special Session of the Human Rights Council (Japan); 101.22. Fully respect freedom of expression and association, and allow for unhindered activities by media (Brazil); 101.23. Put an end to direct and indirect restrictions on freedom of expression and adopt appropriate measures, including legislative measures, to prevent any intimidation of journalists (Poland); 101.24. Immediately end all human rights violations against civilians in relation to their peaceful exercise of freedom of expression and assembly (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland); 101.25. Take concrete steps to implement international legal obligations to protect peaceful assembly in line with calls from the United Nations Secretary-General and the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland); 101.26. Enable civil society to meet peacefully and organise in freedom and safety (Poland). 102. The following recommendations enjoy the support of Syria, which considers the recommendations as being in the process of implementation: 102.1. Incorporate into domestic law and enact the provisions of the international instruments, particularly CAT, CEDAW and CRC (Poland);  102.2. Implement the recommendations of the Committee against Torture (Belgium); 102.3. Immediately end all acts of torture and hold accountable those responsible for such acts (Norway); 102.4. Conduct a credible and impartial investigation and address all allegations of human rights violations with a view to bringing the perpetrators to justice (Thailand); 102.5. Immediately and independently investigate the deaths of all the 88 men and children reported by Amnesty International on 31 August to have died whilst in custody and the thousands of peaceful protestors, including 100 children, reported by the United Nations to have been killed since the protests began in mid-March 2011 (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland); 102.6. Undertake an extensive investigation into acts of on-going violence as well as all allegations of human rights violations (South Africa); 102.7. Bring to justice those who commit arbitrary killings, acts of torture and other human rights violations (Switzerland); 102.8. Promptly undertake measures to address allegations relating to instances of involuntary disappearances, arbitrary arrests, the routine use of torture, violence against women and girls, lack of judicial independence, impunity granted to the members of intelligence agencies, persecution of human rights defenders, and restriction of freedoms of expression and assembly, and carry out fundamental reforms of its laws, policies and practices with a view to improving the current dire human rights situation and preventing its recurrence (Republic of Korea); 102.9. End impunity through a credible investigation by the special judicial commission and try those responsible for human rights violations (Spain); 102.10. Launch a credible and impartial investigation and prosecute those responsible for attacks on peaceful protesters (Poland); 102.11. Review manuals, training and rules of engagement of the security apparatus in the light of the principles developed in the Code of Conduct for Law Enforcement Officials and the Basic Principles of the Use of Force and Firearms by Law Enforcement Officials (Netherlands); 102.12. Reform the legal system so as to entrench accountability of the military and the security apparatus, to end impunity for human rights violations committed by the members of these institutions and provide compensation to the victims (Netherlands); 102.13. Take all measures to respect freedom of expression (Switzerland); 102.14. Revise its Personal Status Act to ensure that women and men have equal rights (Brazil); 102.15. Put an end to all human rights violations (Poland). 103. The following recommendations will be examined by Syria, which will provide responses in due time, but no later than the nineteenth session of the Human Rights Council: 103.1. Ratify the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance at an early date (Japan); 103.2. Ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment of Punishment and the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearances, and accede to the 1951 Refugee Convention on Refugees and its 1967 Optional Protocol (Peru); 103.3. Sign and ratify OPCAT and establish a national preventive mechanism (Maldives); 103.4. Ensure that the judicial definitions contained in human rights treaties are incorporated effectively and in a timely fashion in its national legislation (Peru); 103.5. Adopt a definition of torture in conformity with the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (Brazil); 103.6. Incorporate in the domestic legislation the definition of torture, in line with the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, and ensure that no statement made as a result of torture can be invoked as evidence in any judicial proceedings, in conformity with Article 15 of this Convention (Mexico); 103.7. Consider withdrawing the reservations to articles 14, 20 and 21 of the Convention on the Rights of the Child (Uruguay); 103.8. Withdraw reservations to all international human rights treaties to which it is a party, and consider the ratification of the outstanding human rights treaties (Slovenia); 103.9. Withdraw the reservations to Article 20 of the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment and consider ratifying the Optional Protocol to this Convention (Mexico); 103.10. Implement the obligations undertaken on signing the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman and Degrading Treatment or Punishment (Switzerland); 103.11. Allow the Human Rights Council mandated Commission of Inquiry immediate and unhindered access to Syria (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland); 103.12. Cooperate with the Commission of Inquiry established by the Human Rights Council (Brazil); 103.13. Cooperate with the international community, in particular through cooperation with the Office for the High Commissioner for Human Rights and the recently established Commission of Inquiry (Slovenia); 103.14. Cooperate with the competent authorities of the United Nations and in particular accept the visit of the Independent Commission of Inquiry composed of international experts (Switzerland); 103.15. Cooperate with the United Nations and Human Rights Council mechanisms, particularly the Commission of Inquiry established by the Human Rights Council (Thailand); 103.16. Fully cooperate with the Independent International Commission of Inquiry established under Human Rights Council resolution S-17/1 (Norway); 103.17. Extend cooperation to the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights so that the Office can visit Syria as soon as possible, and facilitate the investigation requested by the Human Rights Council (Chile); 103.18. Allow the International Commission of Inquiry to visit the country to better understand the situation on the ground, and to work with the Government and other stakeholders to ensure accountability and to promote human rights reform (Maldives); 103.19. Fully cooperate with the United Nations human rights mechanisms, including in particular the Commission of Inquiry mandated by the Human Rights Council (Republic of Korea); 103.20. Fully implement Human Rights Council resolutions S-17/1 of 23 August 2011 and to fully cooperate with the independent commission of inquiry (Germany); 103.21. Fully cooperate with the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights and with the Special Procedures (Guatemala); 103.22. Extend all necessary cooperation to the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights for its staff to visit as quickly as possible and to carry out the investigations mandated by resolution S-16/1 (Peru); 103.23. Act upon the resolutions adopted by the Human Rights Council (Guatemala); 103.24. Positively respond to pending visits request by Special Procedures mandate holders (Slovenia); 103.25. Respond favourably to the requests of the Special Rapporteurs on torture and on the situation of human rights defenders to visit the country (Belgium). 104. The recommendations below did not enjoy the support of Syria: 104.1. Ratify or accede, as appropriate, to the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court, the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced  Disappearance, the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment of Punishment and the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (Uruguay);  104.2. Ratify the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court (Poland, Brazil); 104.3. Ratify the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court which it signed in 2000 (Slovenia); 104.4. Withdraw its reservations to various international human rights instruments so as to allow complaints both by individuals and from other States parties (Peru); 104.5. Take heed of the concerns expressed by relevant Treaty Bodies, including on the right to life administration of justice, and gender equality, and fully implement the provisions of the respective treaties (Japan); 104.6. Integrate into national legislation the principles and provisions of international human rights instruments ratified by Syria, and abolish laws that contradict them (Canada); 104.7. Abolish legislative provisions that grant state officials immunity from prosecution, notably by repealing Decrees 14/1969 and 69/2008 (Canada); 104.8. Adopt and enforce laws against domestic violence, and remove mitigating factors from the punishment of “honour-crimes” against women (Canada); 104.9. Allow a Syrian-led transition to take place that will initiate change in laws and lead to the formation of an inclusive and representative government that adheres to the rule of law and upholds the rights of members of religious and ethnic minorities (United States); 104.10. Cease the de facto restitution of the death penalty and executions (Uruguay); 104.11. Immediately end violations of international human rights law, including violent reprisals against peaceful protestors, political activists and their families (United States);  104.12. Heed the calls of the international community by immediately ending the repression and the climate of terror that it has imposed on its own population by respecting in all circumstances the rules of international law and by bringing to justice those responsible and the perpetrators of these crimes (France); 104.13. Immediately end attacks on peaceful protesters and activists and bring violators to account (Australia); 104.14. End its practice of arbitrarily detaining Syrians for participating in peaceful demonstrations and release all those held in detention (Australia); 104.15. Immediately and unconditionally release all prisoners of conscience (United States); 104.16. Allow the access of international observers to the places of detention (Switzerland); 104.17. Place all places of detention under effective judicial supervision and apply international standards for the treatment of detainees (Canada); 104.18. Immediately release all prisoners of conscience, including all persons detained for participating in peaceful demonstrations since March 2011 (Canada); 104.19. Allow full and unfettered access to the United Nations Human Rights Council’s Commission of Inquiry established under Human Rights Council resolution S-17/1 (Australia); 104.20. Allow for a prompt, impartial and independent investigation into all human rights abuses and grant the OHCHR immediate access to conduct investigations (Sweden); 104.21. Prosecute all those responsible for the mass-scale criminal acts that have taken place in the past months, including members of security units, responsible commanders and politicians (Czech Republic); 104.22. Immediately respect the decisions of the Human Rights Council and fully cooperate with the international Commission of Inquiry, including by granting access on the ground and by not inhibiting the mission which it has been entrusted with (France); 104.23. Ensure full compliance with the recommendations of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights as contained in her report to the Human Rights Council of 15 September 2011, reference number A/HRC/18/53 (Slovakia); 104.24. Carry out thorough, transparent and independent investigations into all reports of alleged human rights violations and abuses since March 2011, and bring the perpetrators to justice (Canada); 104.25. Cooperate with the United Nations by giving the Commission of Inquiry established by the United Nations Human Rights Council unfettered access to the country so that it may carry out its mandate (Canada); 104.26. Allow, without restrictions, unhindered access to the country for neutral observers and humanitarian actors (Norway); 104.27. Expeditiously permit international humanitarian missions, human rights observers and media unrestricted access within Syria, including the HRC Commission of Inquiry (United States); 104.28. Allow unrestricted access to journalists, humanitarian workers and the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights (Australia); 104.29. Allow the access of international media, independent media and diplomats (Switzerland); 104.30. Allow journalists to freely exercise their profession and grant international media access to its territory (France); 104.31. Introduce a new media law removing all prison penalties for defamation and libel and guaranteeing the right to be informed by all means, including the internet (Canada); 104.32. Reform the justice system, ensuring its compliance with international standards for fair trial (Canada); 104.33. Respond to the legitimate demands of the Syrian people with a credible process for reform (Australia); 104.34. Establish a registration system to license independent non-governmental organizations consistent with the right to freedom of association (Canada); 104.35. Comply with its legal obligations concerning the rights of minorities and guarantee the civil, political, economic, social and cultural rights of persons belonging to the Kurdish minority (Canada); 104.36. Extend an open and standing invitation to all Special Procedures mandate-holders and fully cooperate with them, permitting them to visit the country (Switzerland); 104.37. Issue a standing invitation to all Special Procedures mandate holders, and cooperate fully with the Commission of Inquiry established at the 17th Special Session of the Human Rights Council so that the latter shall be able to sufficiently conduct fact–finding activities and identify those responsible (Japan); 104.38. Issue a standing invitation to all thematic Special Procedures mandate holders, in particular the Special Rapporteur on the rights to freedom of peaceful assembly and of association (Ireland); 104.39. Issue a standing invitation and cooperate with Special Procedures mandate holders (Brazil); 104.40. Extend an open invitation to the Special Procedures and cooperate with the human rights mechanisms of the Human Rights Council, including the Commission of Inquiry, and allow the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights access to its territory (Spain); 104.41. Extend a standing invitation to all Special Procedures of the Human Rights Council (Uruguay). 105. The following recommendations did not enjoy the support of Syria as it considers that they are based on incorrect assumptions or premises: 105.1. Continue to strengthen the work of the independent commission established to investigate the whereabouts of disappeared persons (Bolivia);  105.2. Revoke recently introduced laws that obstruct fundamental freedoms (Poland); 105.3. Immediately halt the violence against its citizens, which is causing many deaths and injuries, including those of women and children (Japan); 105.4. Immediately end the violence against peaceful protesters, including human rights defenders, and hold accountable those responsible for such acts (Norway); 105.5. Put an immediate stop to the excessive and lethal use of force against demonstrators and the killing of protesters, in respect of its international human rights obligations (Sweden); 105.6. Immediately put an end to repressions of peaceful protests that have led to a high number of deaths and wounded people, including children (Spain); 105.7. Immediately bring to an end the violence and repression against the civilian population (Switzerland); 105.8. Bring its action in line with the assistance provided by the Council, the Secretary-General of the United Nations and the High Commissioner for Human Rights, so as to cease the violent repression, initiate an open national dialogue which is inclusive and transparent, and initiate a reliable and transparent investigation into the violent repression, which has resulted in a high number of injured and dead protestors (Uruguay); 105.9. Investigate all cases of forced disappearances, put an end to secrete detentions and provide reparation to victims (Czech Republic); 105.10. Ensure the prompt, impartial and effective investigation into persisting acts of harassment and persecution against human rights defenders (Slovenia); 105.11. Take immediate steps to stop the arrests of human rights defenders and political dissidents, in accordance with its international human rights obligations (Norway); 105.12. Allow for a free and unimpeded access of humanitarian organisations, medical teams and ambulances (Switzerland); 105.13. Lift its ban over censored websites and revoke the newly-adopted law which introduced an even stricter media censorship (Czech Republic). 106. All conclusions and/or recommendations contained in the present report reflect the position of the submitting States and the State under review. They should not be construed as endorsed by the Working Group as a whole. Annex   Composition of the delegation The delegation of Syria was headed by H.E. Dr. Faysal Mekdad, Vice Minister of Foreign Affairs and composed of the following members: • Mr. Nabil Ali; Consultant, Ministry of Interior; • Mr. Ziad Bediwi; Consultant, Ministry of Interior; • Mr. Najm Al Ahmad; Deputy Minister of Justice; • Ms. Rima Al Kadiri;  Vice President, State Commission for Planning and International Cooperation; • Ms. Rima Hajjar;  Head of Services Department, Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs; • Mr. Mohammad Wassil;  Dean, Faculty of Law, Damascus University; • Ms. Warif Halabi, Human Rights Officer, International Organizations Department, Ministry of Foreign Affairs.     