  United Nations  A/HRC/19/4    General Assembly  Distr.: General 8 December 2011  Original: English  Human Rights Council Nineteenth session Agenda item 6 Universal Periodic Review   Report of the Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review*  * The annex to the present report is circulated as received.   United Republic of Tanzania Contents  Paragraphs Page   Introduction .............................................................................................................  1–4 3  I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process ................................................  5–84 3   A. Presentation by the State under review ...........................................................  5–28 3   B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review ........................  29–84 6  II. Conclusions and/or recommendations .....................................................................  85–88 13  Annex   Composition of the delegation .........................................................................................................  23 Introduction 1. The Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review, established in accordance with Human Rights Council resolution 5/1 of 18 June 2007, held its twelfth session from 3 to 14 October 2011. The review of the United Republic of Tanzania was held at the 2nd meeting on 3 October 2011. The delegation of Tanzania was headed by Mathias Meinrad Chikawe, Minister of State (Good Governance), President’s Office. At its 6th meeting held on 5 October 2011, the Working Group adopted the report on the United Republic of Tanzania. 2. On 20 June 2011, the Human Rights Council selected the following group of rapporteurs (troika) to facilitate the review of the United Republic of Tanzania: Benin, Malaysia and the Russian Federation. 3. In accordance with paragraph 15 of the annex to resolution 5/1, the following documents were issued for the review of the United Republic of Tanzania:  (a) A national report submitted and a written presentation made in accordance with paragraph 15 (a) (A/HRC/WG.6/12/TZA/1);   (b) A compilation prepared by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) in accordance with paragraph 15 (b) (A/HRC/WG.6/12/TZA/2);  (c) A summary prepared by OHCHR in accordance with paragraph 15 (c) (A/HRC/WG.6/12/TZA/3).  4. A list of questions prepared in advance by Canada, Denmark, Ireland, the Netherlands, Norway, Slovenia, Sweden and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland was transmitted to the United Republic of Tanzania through the troika. These questions are available on the extranet of the universal periodic review (UPR).  I. Summary of the proceedings of the review process  A. Presentation by the State under review 5. The Head of the delegation of the United Republic of Tanzania stated that his delegation was diverse by design and that such diversity had characterized the preparatory process of the national report, which was a product of a wide spectrum of consultations in both Tanzania Mainland and Tanzania Zanzibar. 6. Tanzania briefly mentioned the main subjects of the national report. Both the Constitution of the United Republic of Tanzania of 1977 and that of Zanzibar of 1984 contained the Bill of Rights. A number of laws incorporated human rights standards derived from various treaties ratified by the United Republic of Tanzania. 7. The thematic areas included in the national report had been agreed upon by stakeholders: the right to life; the right to equality and non-discrimination; rights of persons with disabilities; rights of the child; health; torture; freedom of expression; the right to participate in public affairs; human trafficking; forced labour; access to justice; education; minorities and indigenous people’s rights; refugee; and asylum-seekers. 8. Voluntary commitments made by Tanzania for the purposes of the promotion and protection of human rights included: submission of periodic human rights reports to various human rights treaty bodies on time; implementation of the Millennium Development Goals and Government development strategies; promotion of democracy, good governance and rule of law; and consideration of ratification of human rights instruments. 9. The report also contained achievements, best practices, challenges and constraints in the promotion and protection of human rights. Government achievements included the establishment of the Government of National Unity of Zanzibar, a United Nations award for meeting the Millennium Development Goal on universal primary education nearly five years ahead of the 2015 deadline, and the granting of citizenship to 162,156 refugees from Burundi and 1,423 refugees from Somalia in June 2010. In August 2011, Tanzania became the first country in Africa to document and make public a report on violence against children. 10. The empowerment funds established by President Jakaya Mrisho Kikwete of the United Republic of Tanzania and Dr. Aman Abeid Karume, former President of Zanzibar, had a very significant role in promoting small and medium entrepreneurs through the provision of soft loans. 11. Tanzania found itself constrained by several factors, relating to traditions, resources and calamities, both natural and manmade. Challenges included the killing of persons with albinism, female genital mutilation (FGM), maternal and child mortality and the quality of education. Key national priorities and initiatives included the finalization of the draft national action plan on human rights, constitutional reforms, prison reforms, improvement of the quality of education and provision of human rights education, particularly in the rural areas, and the recently introduced Green Revolution initiative, aimed at modernizing and commercializing the agricultural sector. 12. The Government had taken legal and administrative measures to mitigate violence and discrimination against women. Tanzanian laws stipulated that women and men in Tanzania had equal property rights, including the right to acquire, inherit, maintain and dispose of properties. The Penal Code criminalized various forms of gender-based violence, including rape, sexual assault and harassment and FGM, while the national and local policies provided important opportunities to address gender-based violence. The National Plan of Action for the Prevention and Eradication of Violence against Women, including FGM, was in place. Furthermore, the Government was working on a comprehensive legal aid legislation for the provision of legal aid. 13. With regard to violence and discrimination against persons with albinism, recently Tanzania had faced a spate of horrific attacks against persons with albinism perpetrated by groups of criminals purporting to profit from sinister beliefs in witchcraft. Tanzania took deliberate measures to reverse the trend through education, advocacy campaigns, and prosecutions attracting severe punishments. Tanzania would continue to sustain those efforts and appealed to its development partners to continue with their support. 14. Apart from the establishment of a national task force to deal with the problem, the Government had fast-tracked investigations and prosecutions of cases concerning the killings of persons with albinism. Consequently, out of 57 incidents that had been reported between 2007 and January 2011, a total of 14 suspects had been apprehended and charged with murder. Investigations were ongoing with respect to the remaining suspects. From January 2011 to date, there had not been any reported incident of violence against persons with albinism. 15. The National Disability Policy required the Government and stakeholders to provide a conducive environment for inclusive education that addressed the special needs of children with disabilities. In addition, the Government provided such children with medical services and continued to encourage stakeholders to support disadvantaged people, including those with albinism. Two persons with albinism were elected Members of Parliament during the 2010 general elections. 16. As to children’s rights and quality of education, despite the achievements that had been recorded in attaining universal primary education, the quality of education remained a national concern. 17. With regard to refugees, Tanzania had maintained a track record as a host country to many refugees. Recently, the Government had facilitated voluntary repatriation of refugees as a result of the normalization of the political situation in their countries of origin. Tanzania was working out the modalities for the relocation of naturalized refugees, which was intended to relocate them away from designated areas with a view to integrating them into the Tanzanian community. The Government appealed to the international community for assistance in that endeavour. 18. As for the freedom of the press, the Government was determined to review laws governing freedom of the press in Tanzania. However, Tanzania was a country where freedom of the press is highly respected. This was evidenced by a large number of privately owned print and electronic media houses.  19. With regard to the issue of receiving complaints and treatment by police, the Commission for Human Rights and Good Governance (CHRAGG) continued to play the role of an oversight body with the mandate to receive and investigate complaints on human rights violations in the country. 20. Tanzania had established a department within the Ministry for Home Affairs which dealt with complaints from the public against the police. In addition, the Inquiries Act permitted the President of Tanzania to establish a committee to conduct investigations into serious complaints. The Parliament also had a mandate to raise an alarm to establish a committee to investigate matters related to human rights violations. 21. Regarding access to justice and prison conditions, Tanzania had increased the number of courts, judges, magistrates and State attorneys. Furthermore, it had implemented the civilianization of the criminal prosecutions programme with a view to separating prosecutions, which previously had been carried out by the police, from investigations. Currently, the police conducted investigations while the prosecution was conducted by State attorneys from the Office of the Attorney General. At the same time, alternative sentencing, such as the imposition of fines and community services, as well as the building of new prisons and renovations of old ones, had been major priorities, intended to reduce crowding in prisons. 22. Regarding ratification of the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (CAT), Tanzania had neither ratified the Convention nor its Optional Protocol, but was considering ratification bearing in mind the fact that the death penalty was still applicable in the country. Torture was prohibited under article 13(6) of the Constitution of the United Republic of Tanzania, 1977. 23. Public opinion was still divided on the death penalty. For that reason, Tanzania had not acceded to the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. 24. Concerning the issue of indigenous people, there was no consensus definition of indigenous peoples in Tanzania. Generally, all ethnic Tanzanians were regarded as indigenous. The position of the Government was that there were special groups that needed special protection within the country. Those included the Maasai, Hadzabe and Barbaig. The Government had taken various measures to provide political, social and cultural amenities to such groups in the fields of health, politics, employment and education. 25. Regarding forced evictions and toxic spillage into drinking water, the Constitution guaranteed the right to property, and land laws prevented forced evictions and provided for compensation where land was used for public interest. As for water control, the National Water Policy of 2002 was in place. The Water Supply and Sanitation Act of 2009 provided for the punishment of persons responsible for water pollution, and the Environmental Management Act established the Environmental Management Council, the duties of which included, inter alia, evaluating projects, potential environmental risks and impacts in that area. 26. With respect to the Constitutional review, the Government had already tabled a bill before the Parliament intended to guide the constitutional review. The bill would establish a Commission and a secretariat which would collect and coordinate public opinions and views. The bill would also provide for the establishment of the people’s forums to discuss a draft new Constitution. The Constituent Assembly would deliberate on the provisions of the draft and the provisions for referendum where the Tanzania citizenry would have the right to vote. 27. Regarding financial support to CHRAGG, the Government operated on cash budget and allocated funds according to what it collected. Inadequacy of funds was not specific to CHRAGG but also to all Government institutions, including the judiciary and the parliament. Allocations depended on the national income. 28. During the consideration of the fourth periodic report of the United Republic of Tanzania on the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR) submitted to the Human Rights Committee in July 2009, Tanzania addressed the status of issues such as laws for marriage, inheritance and succession, citizenship rights, access to education for women, marital rape, FGM, the death penalty, corporal punishment, refugees, and treatment of prisoners. Positions on those issues remained the same.  B. Interactive dialogue and responses by the State under review 29. During the interactive dialogue, 54 delegations made statements. Recommendations made during the dialogue are to be found in section II of the present report. 30. Sri Lanka recognized the commitment of Tanzania towards ensuring the right to health, the development of and increase in health facilities, and the national target to eliminate malaria by 2015. It recommended the continued assistance of the international community in the development of the health sector. It commended Tanzania for meeting the Millennium Development Goal on universal primary education five years ahead of the deadline, and for its efforts in finalizing the national human rights plan of action. Sri Lanka made recommendations. 31. Lesotho indicated that the commitment of Tanzania to human rights had contributed to its sustainable economic growth. Lesotho noted with appreciation the State’s enactment of various laws protecting human rights, including the 2008 Anti-Trafficking in Persons Act. Lesotho noted that Tanzania faced human rights challenges particularly in the area of capacity-building. It made a recommendation. 32. Cuba signalled that Tanzania had achieved significant results in the human rights sphere: achieving the Millennium Development Goal on universal primary education; resettling refugees in third countries; and increasing women’s important roles. Cuba noted that Tanzania had put in place programmes to help less privileged people and also noted positive measures in other human rights areas. Cuba made a recommendation.   33. Zimbabwe expressed the view that the extensive national publicity of the Tanzania UPR process had raised awareness, ensured public participation and helped explain the high quality of the national report. Zimbabwe, while noting the State’s achievements and best practices, was also cognizant of the many challenges Tanzania faced. Zimbabwe made recommendations. 34. Algeria welcomed the consultative process for the elaboration of the national report and the reform to enhance the human rights normative and institutional framework. Algeria congratulated Tanzania for its 2000-2015 programme to develop the educational sector, which allowed it to reach the Millennium Development Goal on primary education. Algeria extended its solidarity to Tanzania in its fight against piracy and recalled its historical role in fighting colonialism and discrimination. Algeria made recommendations. 35. The Russian Federation noted that Tanzania had achieved progress in human rights, particularly regarding the existence of multiple political parties; the significant percentage of women in Parliament; and the mixed composition of the Human Rights Commission. The Russian Federation noted also that anti-discrimination legislation was in force and it welcomed the steps that had been taken by Tanzania to alleviate poverty. The Russian Federation made a recommendation. 36. Finland, commenting on restrictions to the education of persons with disabilities, asked about the Government’s actions to fully implement the act on persons with disabilities and the strategy on inclusive education. Finland referred to forceful and unlawful evictions of indigenous people and asked about actions to implement the recommendations of the Special Rapporteur on the rights of indigenous peoples, as well as legislative measures that the Government intended to take to effectively protect the rights of indigenous peoples. Finland made recommendations. 37. France noted the problems faced by Tanzania relating to the detention of juveniles and other issues relating to the penitentiary system, and inquired on measures taken in that regard. France noted that Tanzania had not abolished the death penalty, and took note of measures adopted to combat violence against women. France noted that FGM was still widely practiced despite its prohibition. France made recommendations. 38. China noted with appreciation that Tanzania had received a United Nations award for meeting the Millennium Development Goal on universal primary education. China commended Tanzania for having facilitated the resettlement of refugees, for having improved women’s participation in political life and having domesticated the Convention on the Rights of the Child. China called on the international community to provide assistance to Tanzania. China made recommendations. 39. Swaziland recalled that Tanzania had provided shelter for thousands of refugees during the struggle for liberation from colonialism and apartheid in South Africa. It referred to the existing institutional framework aimed at the protection of human rights and to the various international instruments signed by Tanzania. Swaziland noted the steps taken to curb the killing of albinos and appealed to the international community to assist Tanzania in its endeavors. 40. India noted with appreciation that Tanzania had met the Millennium Development Goal on universal primary education before the deadline. India echoed the appreciation expressed by the Committee on the Rights of the Child for the State’s long-standing approach to receiving refugees, and welcomed initiatives that had facilitated the resettlement of and granted citizenship to refugees. India echoed the concern expressed by the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women that the public service was male dominated. It welcomed Tanzania’s commitment to protect and promote human rights. 41. Canada recalled the various achievements by Tanzania relating to human rights, mentioning in particular the 2009 Law of the Child Act and the 2010 award for achieving the Millennium Development Goal regarding universal primary education. Among the important challenges facing Tanzania, Canada mentioned violence and discrimination against women, attacks against persons with albinism, limited access to justice, the lack of a separate juvenile justice system and the low quality of education. Canada made recommendations. 42. Nepal commended Tanzania for reducing poverty. It was encouraged by the State’s achievement of one of the Millennium Development Goals. Nepal welcomed the commitment of Tanzania to the protection and promotion of human rights. It commended, inter alia, the constitutional balance of rights and duties, the empowerment of women and the commitment to the social security rights of persons with disabilities. Nepal urged the international community to provide technical assistance. Nepal made recommendations. 43. Mozambique commended Tanzania for the positive progress occurring in human rights and noted that it provided shelter for numerous refugees despite the country’s economic and financial constraints. Mozambique congratulated Tanzania for its award relating to the Millennium Development Goal on education. It encouraged Tanzania to continue its efforts to reduce maternal and child mortality and in discouraging traditions affecting gender equality. Mozambique called on the international community to provide financial assistance. 44. Hungary congratulated Tanzania for meeting the Millennium Development Goal on universal primary education five years before its deadline. Hungary was concerned that Tanzania had abstained from voting on General Assembly resolution 65/206 on the moratorium on the use of the death penalty in 2010. Hungary learned that persons with albinism faced threat of violence and death. Hungary was concerned that specific ethnic groups practiced FGM. Hungary made recommendations. 45. Poland noted with satisfaction efforts made by Tanzania to respond to its challenges in the field of human rights and welcomed the establishment of a national human rights institution with “A” status. Poland stated that efforts should be increased to address challenges, such as gender-based violence, and freedom of expression. Poland inquired on measures taken to combat violence against people with albinism. Poland made recommendations. 46. Ghana congratulated Tanzania for achievements and best practices in the area of human rights. Despite the commitment and commendable efforts of Tanzania to uphold the right of health, Ghana noted that the country still faced a high rate of deaths resulting from preventable diseases. Ghana made recommendations.  47. Slovakia took positive note of the accreditation with “A” status of the national human rights institution and commended Tanzania for the involvement of the civil society in the national report. Slovakia deplored that child labour continued to present a serious challenge despite various initiatives undertaken by Tanzania. It commended Tanzania for the ratification of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and the Optional Protocol thereto. Slovakia made recommendations. 48. Norway congratulated Tanzania on its peaceful and well-organized elections and its decision to start a process of re-writing the national constitution. It congratulated Tanzania for making available national statistics on gender-based violence. It expressed that women’s right to land was another important issue. Norway was concerned over the extrajudicial killings of elderly women. Norway made recommendations. 49. Turkey noted with appreciation that Tanzania was one of the most peaceful democratic countries in Africa and congratulated Tanzania for holding peaceful Presidential and general elections in 2010. Turkey praised Tanzania for preparing a new constitution and underlined the long-standing generous approach to receiving refugees. Turkey noted the efforts made by Tanzania in education and expressed appreciation for the de facto moratorium on the death penalty. Turkey made recommendations. 50. Sweden noted that the Tanzania constitution guaranteed the freedoms of expression, assembly and information. However, several restrictive laws limited them. Sweden welcomed the de facto moratorium on executions; however, it noted that courts continued to impose the death penalty. Sweden noted that the criminalization of sexual minorities contributed to the stigmatization and vulnerability of lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender persons. It commended the efforts made by Tanzania in the area of violence against children. Sweden made recommendations. 51. Australia commended the ratification by Tanzania of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and the Optional Protocol thereto. While noting the progress made by Tanzania in promoting women’s rights, Australia was concerned that gender-based violence remained a problem. It was concerned by reports of declining prison conditions. Australia noted that the death penalty remained in the law and that death sentences continued to be imposed. Australia made recommendations. 52. Germany commended Tanzania for its action taken to address the killings of people with albinism, and inquired on measures taken to prevent the killing of older women accused of witchcraft. Germany welcomed the de facto moratorium on the death penalty and commended Tanzania for its efforts to reform the justice system, and inquired on action taken to decisively fight corruption. While welcoming measures to guarantee gender equality and to combat domestic violence, Germany underlined the high incidence of gender-based violence. Germany made recommendations. 53. Slovenia commended Tanzania for the establishment of the Commission for Human Rights and Good Governance and noted the Human Right Committee’s recommendation on strengthening its capacity. Slovenia asked what kind of measures had been taken to combat violence against women. It was concerned that consensual homosexual relations were criminalized. Slovenia asked what measures Tanzania had taken to improve access to water, and what the main difficulties were in implementing the strategies. Slovenia made recommendations. 54. Japan commended the active commitment to human rights promotion and protection demonstrated by Tanzania, including through the acceptance of special rapporteurs and the facilitation of the resettlement of refugees. While praising advancements made in increasing women’s participation in decision-making process, Japan was concerned at continuing violence against women and girls, and expressed hope that Tanzania would ensure protection and redress for victims of such violence. Japan recalled achievements made in the area of education and stated that it remained committed to assisting Tanzania. Japan made recommendations. 55. South Africa, while commending the progress achieved, requested further information on measures to amend the Citizenship Act, including on land property and inheritance. It asked about the impact of special protection measures for minorities and indigenous peoples; and of measures ensuring the non-recruitment of children in the armed forces. South Africa urged that the technical assistance requested by Tanzania be made available for eliminating gender-based violence. South Africa made recommendations. 56. Brazil welcomed the measures taken by Tanzania to reduce poverty, guarantee food security and increase the participation of women in the judiciary, and its achievement of the Millennium Development Goal on universal primary education. Brazil expressed concerns at gender-based violence and the persistence of harmful traditional practices, such as FGM. Brazil made recommendations. 57. Bangladesh expressed appreciation for the policies and interventions implemented by Tanzania to address food security. Bangladesh hoped that effective implementation of the Sexual Offences Act and the Penal Code would address gender-based violence. It asked about the impact of the Economic Empowerment Fund and the Property and Business Formalisation Programme on poor women. Bangladesh expressed hope that the international community would extend cooperation in the areas of capacity-building and technical assistance. 58. The United States of America, while commending recent efforts taken by Tanzania, expressed concern about reports: of excessive use of force by police and military unit; that the police and judiciary were perceived as most corrupt; and of restrictions on the freedoms of the press and assembly, arbitrary arrest, and threats to and assaults on journalists. It noted the prevalent use of young girls as domestic help and asked what concrete measures Tanzania intended to take to combat gender discriminatory practices rooted in traditional customs. The United States made recommendations. 59. Spain valued the effort made by Tanzania with regard to human rights, and welcomed the visit carried out by the High Commissioner to Tanzania. Spain hoped that Tanzania would continue drafting the human rights action plan and encouraged the commission for the reform of legislation to continue researching and preparing reports. Spain inquired about measures taken by Tanzania to bring to an end the killing of albinos and elderly women. Spain made recommendations. 60. Egypt noted with appreciation that Tanzania continued to host over 600,000 refugees. It welcomed, inter alia, efforts to finalize the draft national human rights plan of action, and to reduce overcrowding in prisons. Egypt supported the Government’s needs for capacity-building in a number of areas, including gender-based violence, human trafficking and dissemination of human rights instruments and recommendations. Egypt made recommendations. 61. Denmark was concerned by reports of law enforcement officers engaging in disproportionate use of force, including reports of torture. It was concerned by the denial or curtailing of indigenous people’s rights to ancestral lands, resulting in numerous forced evictions. Denmark was also concerned by cultural norms, practices and traditions that were discriminatory against women. Denmark made recommendations. 62. Indonesia commended the efforts by Tanzania to uphold human rights and to finalize the draft national human rights plan of action for human rights. It applauded Tanzania for achieving the Millennium Development Goals five years before its deadline and appreciated its hosting of thousands of refugees. Indonesia noted that adverse cultural norms and practices against women persisted and that child labour was a challenge. Indonesia made recommendations. 63. Argentina thanked Tanzania for the presentation of the report and congratulated Tanzania for expressing its willingness to cooperate with the special procedures of the United Nations human rights system. Argentina made recommendations. 64. Uruguay recognized the efforts of Tanzania in the area of promotion and protection of human rights, particularly those made to combat violence against women and to give effect to children’s rights. Uruguay also recognized the State’s commitment to ratify human rights international instruments, as well as the moratorium on the death penalty. Uruguay made recommendations. 65. The Democratic Republic of the Congo noted that Tanzania had welcomed thousands of refugees and hosted the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda and the African Court on Human and Peoples’ Rights. The Democratic Republic of the Congo noted efforts made in the areas of health, gender equality and poverty reduction, but also referred to the increase in violence against women, people with albinism and children linked to sorcery. The Democratic Republic of the Congo made a recommendation. 66. The United Kingdom noted measures taken to improve the judicial system and access to justice, and considered that the establishment of an independent authority for investigating complaints concerning law enforcement officials would be helpful. Noting the existence of gaps in the law on violence against women, it asked whether steps would be taken to address those and to ensure that all forms of violence against women constituted a criminal offence. The United Kingdom made recommendations. 67. The Netherlands commended Tanzania for providing sanctuary to refugees. The Netherlands acknowledged that Tanzania had taken measures to eliminate all forms of violence against women and children; however, it considered that gender-based violence was of growing concern. The Netherlands expressed concerns in relation to freedom of expression and the press. It drew attention to the security of pastoralist groups and their right to land and natural resources. The Netherlands made recommendations. 68. Morocco mentioned the consultative process of the preparation of the national report, and the amendments made to the Constitution in the field of human rights. Morocco welcomed the establishment of the national human rights institution, efforts undertaken for women’s rights and their participation in the society, and measures adopted for youth and persons with disabilities. It inquired on measures taken in the field of health, and encouraged Tanzania to adopt measures for human rights education. Morocco made recommendations. 69. Romania noted as a good practice that Tanzania broadcasted UPR programmes on television stations. It commended Tanzania for decreasing the poverty rate. Romania signalled also that Tanzania had ratified most of the human rights treaties and noted the incorporation of the Convention on the Rights of the Child in the domestic law. However, the situation of children remained problematic, and Romania requested that the State take further steps to combat it. Romania made recommendations. 70. Malaysia noted the commitment of Tanzania to promote and protect human rights as reflected in the enactment of a number of important pieces of legislation. Malaysia noted with encouragement the national priorities identified by Tanzania, such as the finalization of the human rights national action plan, guaranteeing food security and overcoming prison overcrowding. Malaysia made recommendations. 71. Uganda noted the commitment of Tanzania to protect human rights and understood its challenges. Uganda appreciated the endeavours carried out by Tanzania for refugees, as demonstrated by the recent naturalization of 300,000 of them. It also welcomed the establishment of the Economic Empowerment Fund and the enactment of the Law of the Child Act. Uganda made recommendations. 72. Latvia thanked Tanzania for its report and noted that the country had cooperated with special procedures mandate holders. It also noted that several requests by special procedures to visit the country had not been accepted yet. Latvia made a recommendation.  73. Burkina Faso congratulated Tanzania for its achievements in the area of education and inquired whether Tanzania would adopt a national human rights education plan. Burkina Faso noted mitigated results relating to infant and maternal mortality. It encouraged Tanzania to further cooperate with human rights mechanisms and to enhance human rights situation in areas where challenges remained. Burkina Faso made recommendations. 74. Namibia commended Tanzania for being party to most core international human rights instruments, and noted that the State had adopted several initiatives to safeguard the rights of its citizens, including in the health and education sectors and poverty reduction. Namibia also commended Tanzania for establishing an independent national human rights institution and for adopting a moratorium on the death penalty. Namibia made recommendations. 75. Mexico recognized the progress made by Tanzania in the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals and its generosity in receiving refugees and facilitating resettlement. Mexico expressed hope that the UPR would contribute to the human rights national plan of action. Mexico encouraged Tanzania to continue its efforts to provide justice in rural zones, safeguard child rights, and protect minorities and indigenous peoples. Mexico made recommendations.  76. Burundi thanked Tanzania for its role in the return of peace in Burundi and for having hosted refugees. Burundi welcomed the establishment of the national human rights institution and encouraged Tanzania to pursue its efforts for gender equality. Burundi also welcomed efforts made in the areas of gender-based violence, child and maternal mortality and education, and regarding the judiciary. Burundi made a recommendation. 77. Cape Verde noted that for over two decades Tanzania had been involved in political pluralism and democracy and had continued to develop local administrations, providing a space for civil society, as well as setting up an independent national human rights institution. It considered that the current exercise had demonstrated the existence of a political will to improve the situation. Cape Verde made recommendations. 78. Sudan expressed appreciation for the effort made by Tanzania in the promotion and protection of human rights. Sudan commended Tanzania for its achievements, despite the challenges faced, in particular for receiving the United Nations award for achieving the Millennium Development Goal on universal primary education before the targeted date of 2015. Sudan made recommendations. 79. Belgium welcomed the de facto moratorium on the death penalty. It inquired on the establishment of an independent mechanism to handle complaints relating to police abuses, and on the ratification of the Agreement on the Privileges and Immunities of the International Criminal Court. Belgium noted the enactment of the Law of the Child Act, and existing discrimination against women due to customary or religious rules. Belgium made recommendations. 80. Nigeria noted with satisfaction the efforts of Tanzania to guarantee its citizens not just the right to health but also the right to life, through the Presidential initiative aimed at eradicating malaria by 2015. Nigeria commended Tanzania for its efforts to reduce maternal and child mortality, which are key aspects of the Millennium Development Goals. It also commended Tanzania for its various initiatives towards the improvement of the human rights situation. 81. Djibouti welcomed the efforts made by Tanzania for the promotion and protection of human rights. Djibouti made recommendations. 82. Chad noted the constitutional provisions guaranteeing human rights and the ratification by Tanzania of the major international and regional human rights instruments. It noted the consultative approach in the preparation of the national report and underlined the challenges that Tanzania still faced in the area of human rights. Chad made a recommendation. 83. Benin noted that general elections were regularly held in a peaceful manner, and that 36 per cent of the seats in Parliament were held by women. It welcomed the efforts made to host refugees and the recent naturalization of thousands of them. Benin noted the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals relating to primary education and on women’s rights. Benin called on the Human Rights Council to provide Tanzania with assistance. Benin made recommendations. 84. The head of the delegation of Tanzania noted that incidents involving attacks on persons with albinism and killings of elderly women occurred in one specific region of the country. In addition to investigative action, the Government had also responded to the phenomena with educational and awareness-raising programmes. The implementation of a solid legal framework on violence against women and children, and its implementation, had contributed to a decrease of that phenomenon. One of the main priorities of the Government remained the improvement of the quality of education. Freedom of opinion and expression was evidenced by the large number of privately owned print and electronic media in the country. Tanzania had no law on same-sex marriage, as the practice of homosexuality went against its traditional, cultural and religious rights. Homosexuality was illegal and punishable by law.  II. Conclusions and/or recommendations**  ** Conclusions and recommendations have not been edited. 85. The recommendations formulated during the interactive dialogue listed below have been examined by Tanzania and enjoy the support of Tanzania: 85.1. Ratify at the earliest the Agreement on the Privileges and Immunities of the International Criminal Court and take, if the need arises, requested measures to fully integrate the Rome Statute in domestic legislation (Belgium); 85.2. Incorporate provisions from ratified instruments into domestic law and seek the international community to provide the necessary means to tackle difficulties that Tanzania is facing in the area of human rights (Chad); 85.3. That the process of reviewing the constitution is conducted in an open and accountable manner, which includes the general public as well as the national parliament and Zanzibar’s House of Representatives (Norway); 85.4. Continue implementing its national laws in accordance with the universally agreed human rights norms and principles (Lesotho); 85.5. Seek the means to render as effective as possible the respect of the provisions of the Law on the Rights of the Child, of 2009 (Cape Verde); 85.6. Fully apply the Law of the Child Act (Belgium); 85.7. Pursue efforts in human rights related areas, in particular legal review process, female genital mutilation and corporal punishment (Egypt); 85.8. Accelerate its work in forming a special commission to supervise the Constitutional reform which was announced by the President in 2010, its membership should include various structure of the population (Russian Federation); 85.9. Continue to strengthen the capacity of the Commission of Human Rights and Good Governance, including through the collaboration with Regional organizations and United Nations institutions (South Africa); 85.10. Continue institutionalizing the achievements in human rights and work to strengthen national human rights mechanisms and democratic institutions (Nepal); 85.11. Continue with its commendable efforts to promote and protect human rights and freedoms (Sri Lanka); 85.12. Complete as earliest possible the preparation of the National Human Rights Action Plan and implement the plan at earliest (China); 85.13. Prioritize the finalization of the National Human Rights Action Plan for the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights (South Africa); 85.14. Give attention, once the draft of the Human Rights Plan of Action for the promotion and protection of human rights is enacted, not only to the implementation of its articles but also the monitoring of it (Indonesia); 85.15. Complete the draft national action plan for the promotion and protection of human rights and the draft national action plan on violence against women (Algeria); 85.16. Ensure effective implementation of the proposed National Plan of Action for the promotion and protection of human rights (Ghana); 85.17. Conduct an assessment of the national policies on the rights of children and to identify the areas where immediate action may be taken (Romania); 85.18. Implement a national action plan to combat corruption, including enhanced laws and enforcement, more resources dedicated to anti-corruption bodies, a review of law enforcement compensation, and a nation-wide educational campaign (United States of America); 85.19. Take measures to strengthen human rights education and sensitisation (Burkina Faso); 85.20. Take adequate measures to integrate human rights education into school curricula and design human rights training programmes for civil servants and security officers (Morocco); 85.21. Provide human rights training for security forces (United States of America); 85.22. Put in place a comprehensive strategy and effective legislation to eliminate practices that discriminate against women (Denmark); 85.23. Put in place a comprehensive strategy, as advised by CEDAW to modify or eliminate cultural practices and stereotypes that discriminate against women (Ghana); 85.24. Harmonize the legislation to eliminate all forms of discrimination against women, notably to ensure equality relating to inheritance and land rights (Belgium); 85.25. Implement a comprehensive legal and policy framework to end practices which are discriminatory and lead to violence against women and girls, including witchcraft killings, rape, domestic violence and practices related to customary ownership and inheritance of land (Canada); 85.26. Continue its efforts to continue raising awareness at the community level and to fully implement its National Action Plan on Violence against Women (Indonesia); 85.27. Take further steps to protect women and girls against violence and discrimination and put in place appropriate policy measures in that regard (South Africa); 85.28. Continue policies aimed at multiplying and deepening, with inter alia the support of the international cooperation, actions to combat and bring an end to of all forms of gender violence, female genital mutilation and all practices that result either discriminatory or  violating women’s human rights (Argentina); 85.29. Consider strengthening the national gender machinery and put in place a comprehensive strategy, including legislation, to modify or eliminate traditional practices, such as female genital mutilation and stereotypes that discriminate against women, paying special attention to the situation of older women (Brazil); 85.30. Pursue and strengthen efforts to combat social practices harmful to women, in particular female genital mutilation but also all other violence against them as well as discrimination in their access to rights in general (Cape Verde); 85.31. Adopt the necessary measures to eradicate Female Genital Mutilation and to develop programs of awareness and education on its harmful effects (Uruguay); 85.32. Take appropriate measures to eliminate all forms of discrimination against rural women with respect to ownership of land in line with the recommendations of CEDAW (Norway); 85.33. Launch a nationwide education and awareness campaign to prevent stigmatization of persons with albinism to ensure their security and facilitate their equal access to education and employment (Canada); 85.34. Strengthen efforts to protect the rights of all peoples with Albinism (Namibia); 85.35. Continue to ensure full and complete protection of persons with albinism (Djibouti); 85.36. Improve the access for persons with disabilities to education and health care, with particular focus on children (Slovakia); 85.37. Continue with awareness raising measures for the recognition and dissemination of the rights of persons with disabilities and to implement, as quickly as possible, the Law on persons with disabilities (Mexico); 85.38. Continue to work towards protecting and promoting the rights of marginalized and vulnerable population (Nepal); 85.39. Consider strengthening efforts to put a halt to incidents of killings of persons with albinism (Brazil); 85.40. Continue its public awareness campaigns and fast tracking of investigation and prosecution of criminal cases in order to demonstrate to the population that the issue of killing albinos was to be taken seriously (Hungary); 85.41. Continuously conduct nation-wide human rights awareness campaigns with specific emphasis on the right to life of people with albinism (Uganda); 85.42. Do more to provide updated and precise statistics on crimes such as assaults on albinos and extra-judicial killings of elderly women, and that murder of elderly women based on accusations of witchcraft is defined as a specific category in police reports (Norway); 85.43. Ensure that police officers having committed acts of torture of ill-treatment be prosecuted and punished appropriately (Belgium); 85.44. Take adequate measures to protect its population from violence committed by the security forces and establish an independent mechanism for the investigation of complaints regarding abuses carried out by law enforcement officials (Denmark); 85.45. Establish an independent body for investigating complaints about the actions of law enforcement officials (United Kingdom); 85.46. Improve conditions in Tanzania’s prisons, including in relation to overcrowding and inadequate health care (Australia); 85.47. Improve conditions in prisons centers, including alternative mechanism to deprivation of liberty such as community services (Spain); 85.48. Allocate adequate resources to ensure the effective implementation of the National Action Plans to combat Violence Against Women, Violence Against Children and Female Genital Mutilation (Hungary); 85.49. Enhance and strength national programs to combat violence against women and also to continue the much valuable efforts that enable women to participate in legislative council and decision making positions (Sudan); 85.50. Redoubling efforts to protect women and children against all forms of violence, including the use of FGM (Netherlands); 85.51. Continue enforcing appropriate measures, such as the National Plan of Action for the Prevention and Eradication of Violence against Women and Children or the awareness campaign “Say No to Violence”, to eliminate effectively violence against women, in particular domestic violence (Slovakia); 85.52. Enact a law specifically defining and criminalising domestic violence and implement the international obligations in this regard, notably the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (France); 85.53. Take additional measures to stop domestic violence, to extend legal equality to all women, in all areas of law (Germany); 85.54. Strengthen efforts to fulfil its obligations under the Convention on Elimination of Discrimination against Women, including by adopting and implementing legislation prohibiting female genital mutilation (Australia); 85.55. Intensify its efforts to protect women from harmful traditional practices, such as female genital mutilations (France); 85.56. Put in place a comprehensive strategy, including legislative measures to eliminate practices and stereotypes that discriminate women, such as female genital mutilation (Poland); 85.57. Provide all victims of violence against women an unhindered access to justice and ensure that all perpetrators are brought to justice in accordance with international standards (Slovakia); 85.58. Continue this important work related to violence against children by undertaking civic education at all levels of society, especially throughout the educational system and justice system, on the negative effects of violence against children (Sweden); 85.59. Address child labour as a matter of urgency in accordance to its international commitments, notably ILO Conventions No. 138 and 182 (Slovakia); 85.60. Fully implement the National Plan of Action on Child Labour (United States of America); 85.61. Step up its legislative and policy measures, awareness campaigns and implementation of the 2025 Time Bound Programme on the elimination of child labour (Indonesia); 85.62. Undertake more effective measures to address the problems of trafficking, sexual abuse and exploitation of women and children, including through ensuring effective implementation of the relevant legislations and undertaking intensive media and education programmes aimed to increase public awareness and sensitivities on the rights of women and children (Malaysia); 85.63. Adopt a national program against human trafficking, in particular of women and children, in order to prevent this crime, rehabilitate victims and prosecute perpetrators (Mexico); 85.64. Take the necessary steps to strengthen international cooperation through multilateral, regional and bilateral arrangements for the prevention, detection, investigation, prosecution and punishment of those responsible for acts involving the sale of children, child prostitution, child pornography and child sex tourism (Egypt); 85.65. Deploy more efforts in order to address the problem of street children and child work and to devise training programs and to improve qualifications of those working in the field in order to receive the necessary technical cooperation assistance from human rights mechanisms and other relevant organisations (Sudan); 85.66. Improve the efficiency of the justice system by streamlining and simplifying judicial procedures including introducing a case management system that tracks individual cases from filing to disposition and limits the amount of time each case can be held at each stage (Canada); 85.67. Vigorously prosecute security force personnel who violate the law (United States of America); 85.68. Ensure all security forces are subject to strict control of civilian authorities (United States of America); 85.69. Pursue to enhance the juvenile justice system and ensure separation of juveniles from adults in detention (Djibouti); 85.70. Assign resources to the Judicial Power that facilitate access to justice, particularly in rural areas (Spain); 85.71. Ensure free birth registration and in this regard conduct relevant awareness-raising campaigns for the public and adopt efficient policies with a view to cover country’s remote and rural areas (Slovakia); 85.72. Guaranteeing the freedom of expression, association and assembly by allowing human rights defenders, political opponents and journalists to express freely their views in line with international human rights law (Netherlands); 85.73. Work with the media and other stakeholders to ensure that all organs of the State understand and appreciate the constitutional guarantees of freedoms of press and assembly (United States of America); 85.74. Respecting the core labour standards and promoting corporate social responsibility throughout Tanzania, and in particular, develop and implement measures to eliminate child labour (Netherlands); 85.75. Intensify programmes to combat poverty (Algeria); 85.76. Continue applying the social economic strategies and development plans of the country in order to achieve the Millennium Development Goals between now and 2015 (Cuba); 85.77. Strengthen policy that would protect and promote food security as well as increase in the access to adequate, clean and safe drinking water especially for the population who live below poverty line (Malaysia); 85.78. Increase cooperation with the relevant United Nations bodies and other international organizations in the efforts to reduce the incidence of maternal and infant mortality and increase women’s access to health care facilities (Malaysia); 85.79. Seek international assistance to supplement the national efforts to reduce maternal and child mortality (Uganda); 85.80. One of the main priorities of the Government remains a quick improvement of the quality of teaching   (Sri Lanka); 85.81. Pursue its efforts in the area of child and maternal mortality to reach a significant decrease of mother, new-born and children deaths (Burkina Faso); 85.82. Take the necessary measures to increase women’s access to health care facilities and medical assistance by trained personnel, in particular in rural areas, in order to reduce the incidence of maternal and infant mortality and to enhance the life expectancy of women (Japan); 85.83. Continue its current efforts to guarantee education for all (Morocco); 85.84. Put in place a comprehensive strategy to ensure that all children have equal access to education (Poland); 85.85. Continue to put more resources in education to reduce overcrowding in classrooms (Zimbabwe); 85.86. Introduce, in the interim, “hot seating” in schools as a stop gap measure to reduce overcrowding in classes (Zimbabwe); 85.87. Redouble its efforts to develop and maintain a qualified cadre of highly motivated primary and secondary school teachers capable of providing quality education to students (Canada); 85.88. Give special attention to the attendance of children to secondary schools (Turkey); 85.89. Continue strengthening the quality of education delivery at the basic, secondary and tertiary levels (Ghana); 85.90. Improve schools and other educational facilities and environments to meet the needs of persons with disabilities (Finland); 85.91. Train all lecturers and teachers in inclusive education (Finland); 85.92. Continue working with the international donor community to work with Tanzania on capacity building measures to as to ensure education for all (Zimbabwe); 85.93. Provide pupils with disabilities with adequate equipment and tools (Finland); 85.94. Share its experience relating to primary education and the promotion of women’s rights with interested countries (Benin); 85.95. Engage the civil society in the process of implementation of the UPR recommendations (Poland); 85.96. Request for technical assistance and capacity building from the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights in order to continue to improve the lives of the Tanzanians (Namibia). 86. The following recommendations will be examined by Tanzania, which will provide responses in due time, but no later than the nineteenth session of the Human Rights Council in March 2012. The response of Tanzania to these recommendations will be included in the outcome report adopted by the Human Rights Council at its nineteenth session: 86.1. Sign and ratify also remaining core international human rights instruments (OP-ICESCR, ICCPR-OP1 and OP2, CAT, OP-CAT) (Slovenia); 86.2. Study the possibility of ratifying the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families (Algeria); 86.3. Consider the possibility to ratify the: Convention against Torture; International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families; International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance; Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (Argentina); 86.4. Ratify the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (Denmark); 86.5. Ratify the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (Democratic Republic of the Congo); 86.6. Ratify the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment and its Optional Protocol (Benin); 86.7. Ratify the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment and incorporate its provisions into domestic law (Poland); 86.8. Accede to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or degrading Treatment of Punishment, and incorporate its provisions into domestic law (Australia); 86.9. Consider acceding to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment and to the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (Brazil); 86.10. Continue to expand the range of main international human rights instruments in effect in the country, in particular through the ratification of the United Nations Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment and the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, which aims at abolishing the death penalty (Cape Verde); 86.11. Sign and ratify the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment and ratify the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance (France); 86.12. Sign and ratify the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment and the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance (Spain); 86.13. Accede to the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance and to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment as soon as possible (Japan); 86.14. Ratify or sign, whichever is applicable, the convention against Torture, and its Optional Protocol,  the Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance and the two Protocols of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (Uruguay); 86.15. Establish a clear modality of direct access of the public to give input in the process of reviewing the Constitution (Norway); 86.16. Consider issuing a standing invitation to special procedures (Brazil); 86.17. Consider extending a standing invitation to all special procedures of the Human Rights Council (Latvia); 86.18. Extend an open and standing invitation to all Special Procedures (Spain); 86.19. Extend an open invitation to all Special Procedures of the Human Rights Council (Uruguay); 86.20. Issue a standing invitation to the Special Procedures of the United Nations Human Rights Council (Romania); 86.21. Establish a moratorium on executions towards a complete abolition of the death penalty and commute all sentences to death to jail sentences (France); 86.22. Establish a de jure moratorium on the use of death penalty as a step towards its abolition (Hungary); 86.23. Establish a moratorium on executions with a view to abolishing the death penalty as provided by UN General Assembly Resolutions (Slovenia); 86.24. Formalise the de facto moratorium as a step towards the complete abolition of the death penalty (Denmark); 86.25. Consider abolishing the death penalty (Turkey); 86.26. Consider abolishing the death penalty (Brazil); 86.27. Carry out efforts to repeal the application of the death penalty (Argentina); 86.28. Modify the existing Penal Code in order to definitely abolish the death penalty in Tanzania legislation (Spain); 86.29. Abolish definitively the death penalty in conformity with the provisions contained in the second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (Uruguay); 86.30. Abolish the death penalty within the projected constitutional reform and to ratify the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and, if it is not the case, consider declaring an official moratorium on the death penalty (Germany); 86.31. Abolish the death penalty and accede to the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR-OP 2) (United Kingdom); 86.32. Abolish the death penalty and ratify the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (Belgium); 86.33. Abolish the death penalty and consider ratifying the second Optional Protocol to ICCPR (Romania); 86.34. Ratify the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, amend the Constitution to abolish any constitutional provisions that provide for death penalty, provides civic education at all levels of the society on the need of abolishing the death penalty and commute the death sentences of current prisoners awaiting execution (Sweden); 86.35. Accede to the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, aimed at abolishing the death penalty, and take the necessary steps to remove the death penalty from Tanzania’s justice system (Australia); 86.36. Step up its efforts to protect women and girls from sexual violence also in marriage (Norway); 86.37. Strengthen measures aiming to make effective the rights of the Child from an integral perspective and based on the Convention on the Rights of the Child, particularly on issue of eradication of child labour, violence and sexual abuses, corporal punishment and street children conditions (Uruguay); 86.38. Prohibit all violence against children, including corporal punishment (Sweden); 86.39. Amend marriage law in order that the minimum age for marriage for both girls and boys is set at 18 (Denmark); 86.40. Adopt a new media law enshrining freedom of the press (Canada); 86.41. Adopt new legislation that guarantees the freedom of the media as well as the right to information (Norway); 86.42. Put an end to direct and indirect restrictions on freedom of expression and adopt appropriate measures, including legislative measures, to prevent intimidation of journalists (Poland); 86.43. Work to abolish laws that restricts freedom of expression, information and freedom of media, and establish laws that will guarantee these rights in line with international human rights standards (Sweden); 86.44. Respect the right to assembly throughout the process of reviewing the Constitution (Norway); 86.45. Hold responsible alleged perpetrators of forced evictions and pollution of drinking water in the area around the big mines (Norway); 86.46. Align policies to ensure access to land and water for pastoralists with the African Union Framework on Pastoralism and to conclude regional agreements to facilitate cross-border pastoralism (Netherlands); 86.47. Continue to promote the right to education, while prohibiting corporal punishment (Djibouti); 86.48. Recognise the notion of indigenous peoples with a view to effectively protecting their rights (Denmark); 86.49. Adopt measures to protect and preserve the cultural heritage and traditional way of life of indigenous peoples and undertake effective consultations with indigenous peoples based on free, prior and informed consent (Denmark); 86.50. Launch a credible investigation of forced evictions and land conflicts and use the results of this investigation to help draft new legislation, which fully takes the rights of indigenous peoples into account (Finland); 86.51. Promote a legal framework giving legal certitude in terms of property, in particular with regard to land ownership and protection against force evictions and recognition of the rights of indigenous people, pastoralists, hunters and gathering peoples (Mexico); 86.52. Set up an effective statutory consultation mechanism with organizations working on the rights of indigenous peoples to help avoid further conflicts (Finland); 86.53. Undertake, as a voluntary measure, a mid-term report to the Human Rights Council on the implementation of the adopted recommendations of this UPR working Group (Hungary). 87. The recommendations below did not enjoy the support of Tanzania: 87.1. Commit itself to the protection of the rights of all persons regardless of their sexual orientation or gender identity in anti-discrimination and equal opportunity legislation and bodies (Sweden); 87.2. Adopt political and legislative measures to establish a specific framework for the protection against discrimination based on sexual preferences accompanied with the elimination of penal provisions that criminalize consensual relations between adults from the same gender, and the implementation of public awareness campaigns in this matter (Spain); 87.3. Repeal criminal provisions against persons based on their sexual orientation (Slovenia); 87.4. Put in place a comprehensive strategy, including legislative measures to eliminate practices and stereotypes that discriminate women, such as polygamy and the bride price (Poland). 88. All conclusions and/or recommendations contained in the present report reflect the position of the submitting State(s) and/or the State under review. They should not be construed as endorsed by the Working Group as a whole. Annex   Composition of the delegation The delegation of the United Republic of Tanzania was headed by Hon. Mathias M. Chikawe (MP), Minister of State - Good Governance, President’s Office, and composed of the following members: • Hon. Abdubakar Khamis Bakari, Minister of Justice, Constitutional and Legal Affairs Revolutionary Government of Zanzibar, Alternate Head of Delegation; • H.E. Ambassador Dr. Matern Y.C.Lumbanga, Permanent Representative of Tanzania to UN, Geneva, Delegate; • Oliver P. MHAIKI, Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Constitutional Affairs and Justice, Delegate; • Phillip Gerald SALIBOKO, Chief Executive Officer, Registration, Insolvency and Trusteeship Agency (RITA), Delegate; • Mathew MWAIMU, Director for Constitutional Affairs and Human Rights Office of the Attorney General, Delegate; • Joseph J.K. NDUNGURU, Director – Public Legal Services Division, Ministry of Constitutional Affairs and Justice, Delegate; • Hilda Nkanda Peter KABISSA, Assistant Director, President’s Office –Public Service Management, Delegate; • Ibrahim Sapi MKWAWA, Assistant Registrar, Office of the Registrar of Political Parties, Delegate; • Venosa MKWIZU, Principal State attorney, National Electoral Commission (NEC), Delegate; • Baraka H. LUVANDA, First Secretary, Ministry of Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation, Delegate; • Ali Ali Hassan, Senior State Attorney, Attorney General’s Office – Zanzibar, Delegate; • Sarah .D. MWAIPOPO, Senior State Attorney, Office of the Attorney General, Delegate; • Alesia NDUNGURU, Senior State Attorney, Office of the Attorney General, Delegate; • Gella Elisha SAMBULA, Senior State Attorney, Ministry of Lands Housing and human settlements, Delegate; • Lt. Col. Mgisa L. Masha, Defence force headquarters, Delegate; • Kamana S. KAMANA, State Attorney & Private Assistant to the Minister, Ministry of Justice and Constitutional and Legal Affairs, Delegate; • Eunice M. KAWANGA, Inspector of Immigration Service, Ministry of Home Affairs, Delegate; • Deusdedit B. Kaganda, First Secretary, Tanzania Mission to UN, Geneva, Delegate.     